--- PAGE 1 ---
FUTURE READY
From education to industry, more students and professional engineers are    embracing a mindset of self-directed and lifelong learning.    BY JEFF O’HEIR
O
ne of the worst global crises of the last cen-
tury is yielding some of the best strategies in 
decades for closing the skills gap, improving 
education, and enhancing the skills and career 
development of engineers of all age groups. 
The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics projects 
employment growth for engineers, with nearly 
140,000 new jobs expected for engineers from 2016 to 2026. 
According to industry experts, that growth will be led partly 
by the use of digital technologies including artificial intelli-
gence, additive manufacturing, robotics, and virtual reality.
“The jobs are going to be changing very rapidly in the next 
five to 10 years. Given what we know about the evolution of 
skills and how that really creates gaps for the industry, we are 
trying to find a way to manage these changes in a practical 
way,” said Lisa Lang, the head of Learning and Education 
Americas at Siemens. “And with skills becoming obsolete 
before we know, it’s really important that employees are 
constantly developing and growing to remain relevant in the 
workforce."
0821_MEM_FEA_WD_Learning and Skills.indd   380821_MEM_FEA_WD_Learning and Skills.indd   38 6/23/21   2:26 PM6/23/21   2:26 PM
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/memagazineselect/article-pdf/143/5/38/6763596/me-2021-sept2.pdf by Jeff Alderson on 09 June 2026

--- PAGE 2 ---
FUTURE READY
From education to industry, more students and professional engineers are    embracing a mindset of self-directed and lifelong learning.    BY JEFF O’HEIR
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING   |  AUGUST/SEPTEMBER 2021   |  P. 39
As the global pandemic put added pressure on industries 
that were already struggling to fill their ranks, engineering 
companies have been investing in training to bring their 
existing workforce up to speed. Over the last year, as work-
places became remote, online learning opportunities have 
helped in upskilling and reskilling the engineering workforce.
In March 2021, the editors of Mechanical Engineering con-
vened with top educators and industry leaders for a four-part 
webinar series, titled “Engineering Education: The Future 
is Now” exploring which new skills will be taught to young 
engineers, what training mid-career engineers need in order 
to return to work as the pandemic subsides, and how much 
more can be done to confront the labor and skills gap in 2021 
and beyond. 
The conversations unearthed many lessons learned from 
dealing with the chaos, disruption, isolation, and frustra-
tion born from COVID 19. But those hard-won lessons, the 
experts warned, would be in vain unless all stakeholders work 
together toward implementing the changes needed to turn the 
best of them into reality.
0821_MEM_FEA_WD_Learning and Skills.indd   390821_MEM_FEA_WD_Learning and Skills.indd   39 6/23/21   2:26 PM6/23/21   2:26 PM
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/memagazineselect/article-pdf/143/5/38/6763596/me-2021-sept2.pdf by Jeff Alderson on 09 June 2026

--- PAGE 3 ---
To get a good sense of the genesis, progress, and impact of 
those changes, it’s best to begin at higher education, where 
colleges and universities had to quickly pivot to remotely 
teach, nurture, graduate, and prepare students for an uncer-
tain job market. 
The job market will remain tough. But educators say the 
members of the COVID-19 Class have developed a resil-
iency, flexibility, and patience they haven’t seen in previous 
graduates. Those strengths, some say, will help those young 
engineers emerge as the next “greatest generation” since those 
who came of age during World War II. 
“The silver lining to this horrible dark cloud that we’ve been 
through is that these students will be magnificent,” said Sanjay 
Sarma, the Fred and Daniel Flowers Professor of Mechanical 
Engineering and vice president for Open Learning at MIT. 
“They are forged in fire and going to come out as a mini 
greatest generation. We need to give them the tools and the 
opportunities to be that.”
CONTINUED LEARNING
Unfortunately, the pandemic revealed that those tools 
weren’t always there for every student who needed them. 
Remote learning exposed the lack of equitable access many 
students had to broadband and the cloud, advanced software, 
and the portable devices needed to properly learn and work. 
The quarantine forced many institutions, as well as busi-
nesses, to do a better job providing those digital and physical 
resources. 
“The students are more prepared to actually live and work 
the way that I am,” said Jeff Alderson, a product manager at 
MathWorks, a developer of mathematical computing software, 
who explained that many of the communication, collabora-
tion, code sharing, modeling, simulation, and virtual lab tools 
many students now have access to are the same that are used 
in industry. “It’s good to have that sort of hands-on experience 
with the practices of their profession.”
Prior to the pandemic and worldwide lockdowns, some 
key engineering software developers had already developed 
innovative platforms that improved their online features and 
capabilities, which greatly helped students and professionals 
work remotely. Some developers, such as MathWorks, also 
began adding a plethora of new content, such as models, 
project examples, lectures, labs, and assessments, to improve 
the online learning experience, Alderson said. 
Many schools recognized the importance of that access 
to digital tools and portable technologies after schools shut 
down. As a result, schools like the University of Colorado 
Boulder are investing in more digitized tools and portable 
gear, said Daria Kotys-Schwartz, director of CU’s College of 
Engineering and Applied Science. “This year has pushed all of 
us to think in completely different ways about the way we’re 
educating,” she said.
Another outcome of learning and working remotely is that 
more students and professional engineers have embraced self-
directed learning at levels not seen before, Kotys-Schwartz 
and others said. This practice represents an important trend 
since lifelong, self-directed learning is one of the best ways for 
engineers of all levels to close skills gaps, learn new technolo-
gies, and advance more quickly in their studies and careers. 
The benefits are especially relevant since many companies 
plan to retain at least partial work-from-home programs as 
they watch the course of the pandemic.
0821_MEM_FEA_WD_Learning and Skills.indd   400821_MEM_FEA_WD_Learning and Skills.indd   40 6/23/21   2:26 PM6/23/21   2:26 PM
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/memagazineselect/article-pdf/143/5/38/6763596/me-2021-sept2.pdf by Jeff Alderson on 09 June 2026

--- PAGE 4 ---
“You have to embrace a mindset of lifelong learning to 
stay abreast of these new technologies in your profession,” 
Alderson said. “Every company that you go to in industry is 
using special types of tools. Online learning is giving you an 
eye into that. As a lifelong learner you have to take advantage 
of those things.”
“There’s an equilibrium that occurs between self-directed 
learning as well as your employers-directed learning and, of 
course, you need to do what your employer requires in terms 
of table stakes training based on your state or jurisdiction, but 
I think it’s a combination,” said Arin Ceglia, ASME’s director 
of learning and development. There is a large spectrum of 
available ways to attain skills—everything from additional 
advanced degrees to micro credentials, which are very 
common and popular at the moment, as well as training in 
specific topic areas, she said.
SHOWCASING TALENT
But a lot of that work will be wasted unless the projects and 
skills that result from in-class and self-directed learning are 
saved and electronically archived (using YouTube, electronic 
portfolios, GitHub, share files and other tools) for sharing 
with prospective employers or current managers to win jobs, 
advance in the workplace, and close skills gaps. That practice 
becomes more important as internships and other jobs remain 
remote.  
“One thing that’s really changing engineering education 
is that the artifacts of learning don’t stay on your computer,” 
Alderson said. “You should be able to hit the ground running 
in industry with files and functions and models that you’ve 
used in your academic career. It’s really important to take that 
stuff with you.”
A well-managed and robust portfolio will also help candi-
dates prove to recruiters and others they can be productive 
in a remote environment. “Recruiters are going to want to 
understand how you adapt to that environment, not how 
you fell prey to it,” said Rob Feinstein, a veteran of the online 
recruiting industry and author of Launched: Start Y our Career 
Right After College, Even During a Pandemic. 
Despite all of the advances in technology, every piece of 
content in a job candidate’s online portfolio should strive to 
answer three old-school questions that almost every recruiter 
or manager wants to know: Do you have the skills and experi-
ence to do the job? Do you have the interest and passion? Do 
you have the personality or attitude to get it done?
“Employers are well aware of what everybody’s going 
through. On the other hand, employers still have needs,” said 
Michael Powell, director of the career assistance center at the 
University of Texas at Austin. “Everything they’re looking at 
on your resume, every question they ask you is designed to 
answer those three questions. That’s what it all comes down 
to.”
Recruiters understand that many in-person internships 
and entry-level engineering jobs have been put on hold. But 
they are still looking for students who managed to build need 
skills—especially in leadership and team building—during the 
pandemic. Those experiences could include running a virtual 
club or working as a residence assistant. Gaining and docu-
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING   |  AUGUST/SEPTEMBER 2021   |  P. 41
0821_MEM_FEA_WD_Learning and Skills.indd   410821_MEM_FEA_WD_Learning and Skills.indd   41 6/23/21   2:26 PM6/23/21   2:26 PM
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/memagazineselect/article-pdf/143/5/38/6763596/me-2021-sept2.pdf by Jeff Alderson on 09 June 2026

--- PAGE 5 ---
menting those skills and achievements will grow increas-
ingly important as the “gig” economy, fueled by freelance 
and contract workers, continues to grow as large companies 
refrain from hiring full-time employees. 
COMMUNICATION BREAKDOWN 
Students and professional engineers might have devel-
oped greater resiliency and flexibility during the pandemic, 
but many still have trouble communicating with multi-
generational colleagues of different levels in the workplace. 
It’s always been a problem and something that has held back 
engineers in their careers. 
“Many engineers aren’t good communicators and don’t try 
to be,” said Michael Horodniceanu, a professor at New York 
University’s Tandon School of Engineering. “The people at 
the higher levels are able to address a topic in a very succinct 
and clear fashion, and that’s not the strength of engineers. 
The ability to communicate creates trust. Trust is the ulti-
mate thing that engineers must realize that they need.” 
The isolation and lack of in-person contact during 
quarantine, experts say, have exacerbated the issue. Some 
schools and companies see an urgent need to address the 
problem before cross-disciplinary teams are called back to 
the workplace to work on the same projects. The communi-
cation breakdown, experts say, affects engineers of all ages 
and career stages.
Virtual meetings have replaced the conference room, and 
the limited time available to collaborate means engineers, 
project managers, sales, and directors all need to communi-
cate quicker and more efficiently.
“It’s important to recognize that engineers don’t neces-
sarily speak the same language as business folks or mar-
keters or finance people,” said ASME’s Ceglia. “In order 
to be a successful mid-career engineer, you really need to 
be able to communicate with all of the different folks that 
you’re going to engage with.”
Weak communication skills are something companies 
have to address early during the on-boarding process, 
Kotys-Schwartz said. Companies should also offer ongoing 
training in communications and other soft skills, which is 
needed more today than ever before, experts said.
“It’s one of the areas we’re finding to be the most difficult 
to coach in this environment,” Kotys-Schwartz said, adding 
that students also have to learn how to sit still in small 
environments like the boardroom, communicate effectively 
via email, and carry on a telephone conversation. “No matter 
how hard I try in their senior year, I cannot replicate what 
it is going to be like working in different types of industries 
and environments. Our students need soft and professional 
skills and will continue to need coaching and development 
in them, because we don’t know for sure how they’re doing 
in that realm this year.”
0821_MEM_FEA_WD_Learning and Skills.indd   420821_MEM_FEA_WD_Learning and Skills.indd   42 6/23/21   2:26 PM6/23/21   2:26 PM
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/memagazineselect/article-pdf/143/5/38/6763596/me-2021-sept2.pdf by Jeff Alderson on 09 June 2026

--- PAGE 6 ---
STUCK IN THE MIDDLE 
Before the pandemic, engineers were in strong demand 
across industries. But that changed for some as companies 
were forced to lay off workers or postpone promotions and 
other types of advancement. While most of the previously 
mentioned tips and strategies also apply to mid-career engi-
neers, here are a few aimed specifically at those who are a bit 
more vulnerable to layoffs during difficult times. Of course, 
all engineers looking to advance should practice them.
The most important qualities a mid-career engineer can 
display are flexibility and versatility. “Raising your hand” to 
take on a new assignment is among the best ways to prove 
that. Hyleme George, associate vice president of innovation 
and strategy at Black & Veatch, an engineering firm based 
in Overland Park, Kans., said those enthusiastic, willing 
engineers are the employees his company values the most, 
especially if they can apply a variety of past skills to a new 
project, business unit, or market.  
“Those are the ones that are valuable to us. They give us a 
chance to take an individual and move him or her around the 
company,” he said. “It helps us do a better job as of balancing 
the talent we have with the demand that we have from our 
clients and our projects.” 
NYU’s Horodniceanu has always been big on raising his 
hand whenever a new opportunity was presented. That 
enthusiasm helps explain his varied career, which includes 
working in transportation, executive management, and in 
government and private enterprise. 
“You have to be willing to compromise. You have to be 
willing to do certain things that are not the norm,” he said. 
“You have to be willing to change when needed and tackle 
the issues that you have never tackled before. That is going to 
make you a very worthwhile employee.”
Today, there are more ways than ever to attain the skills 
and experience an organization needs to fill its vacant posi-
tions. It often takes just a bit extra drive or initiative on the 
part of an ambitious employee to take advantage of those 
options. But it can be done… during a pandemic and long 
after it has ended.
“What’s most important to the mid-career engineers is 
to always be committed to lifelong learning, whether it’s 
formal or informal training,” Ceglia said. “We always learn by 
exploring new topic areas and grow as a result. It makes us 
more versatile.”
Adopting an agile learning mindset is essential for the 
engineering workforce. As companies implement new digital 
engineering technologies, engineers will need to continu-
ously reskill and upskill to be future ready. ME
JEFF O’HEIR is a science and technology writer based in Hutington, N.Y.
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING   |  AUGUST/SEPTEMBER 2021   |  P. 43
0821_MEM_FEA_WD_Learning and Skills.indd   430821_MEM_FEA_WD_Learning and Skills.indd   43 6/23/21   2:26 PM6/23/21   2:26 PM
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/memagazineselect/article-pdf/143/5/38/6763596/me-2021-sept2.pdf by Jeff Alderson on 09 June 2026

