THE LEGACY OF INBLOOM
Monica Bulger, Patrick McCormick, Mikaela Pitcan 
Working Paper 02.02.2017


www.datasociety.net 
The Legacy of inBloom   3
The Legacy of inBloom
Working Paper 02.02.2017
Monica Bulger, Patrick McCormick, Mikaela Pitcan 
Executive Summary
Why Do We Still Talk About InBloom?
Many people in the area of educational technology still discuss the story of inBloom. InBloom was an 
ambitious edtech initiative funded in 2011, launched in 2013, and ended in 2014. We asked ourselves why 
the story of inBloom is important, and conducted a year-long case study to find the answer. For some, 
inBloom’s story is one of contradiction: the initiative began with unprecedented scope and resources. And 
yet, its decline was swift and public. What caused a $100 million initiative with technical talent and political 
support to close in just one year? A key factor was the combination of the public’s low tolerance for risk 
and uncertainty and the inBloom initiative’s failure to communicate the benefits of its platform and achieve 
buy-in from key stakeholders. InBloom’s public failure to achieve its ambitions catalyzed discussions of stu-
dent data privacy across the education ecosystem, resulting in student data privacy legislation, an industry 
pledge, and improved analysis of the risks and opportunities of student data use. It also surfaced the pub-
lic’s low tolerance for risk and uncertainty, and the vulnerability of large-scale projects to public backlash. 
Any future U. S. edtech project will have to contend with the legacy of inBloom, and so this research begins 
to analyze exactly what that legacy is.
The inBloom Story
InBloom was a $100 million educational technology initiative primarily funded by the Bill & Melinda Gates 
Foundation that aimed to improve American schools by providing a centralized platform for data sharing, 
learning apps, and curricula. In a manner that has become a hallmark of the Gates Foundation’s large scale 
initiatives, inBloom was incredibly ambitious, well-funded, and expected to deliver high impact solutions 
in a short time frame. The initiative aimed to foster a multi-state consortium to co-develop the platform 
and share best practices. It intended to address the challenge of siloed data storage that prevented the 
interoperability of existing school datasets by introducing shared standards, an open source platform 
that would allow local iteration, and district-level user authentication to improve security. By providing 
a platform for learning applications, founders of inBloom set out to challenge the domination of major 

Data & Society Research Institute
4
education publishers in the education software market and allow smaller vendors to enter the space. 
Ultimately, the initiative planned to organize existing data into meaningful reporting for teachers and 
school administrators to inform personalized instruction and improve learning outcomes.
The initiative was initially funded in 2011 and publicly launched in February, 2013. What followed was a 
public backlash over inBloom’s intended use of student data, surfacing concerns over privacy and protec-
tion. Barely a year later, inBloom announced its closure. Was this swift failure a result of flying too close to 
the sun, being too lofty in ambition, or were there deeper structural or external factors?
To examine the factors that contributed to inBloom’s closure, we interviewed 18 key actors who were 
involved in the inBloom initiative, the Shared Learning Infrastructure (SLI) and the Shared Learning Collab-
orative (SLC), the latter of which were elements under the broader inBloom umbrella. Interview participants 
included administrators from school districts and state-level departments of education, major technology 
companies, former Gates Foundation and inBloom employees, parent advocates, parents, student data 
privacy experts, programmers, and engineers.
Co-occurring Events
The inBloom initiative occurred during a historically tumultuous time for the public understanding of data 
use. It coincided with Edward Snowden’s revelations about the NSA collecting data on U.S. civilians sparking 
concerns about government overreach, the Occupy Wall Street protests surfacing anti-corporation senti-
ments, and data breaches reported by Target, Kmart, Staples, and other large retailers. The beginnings 
of a national awareness of the volume of personal data generated by everyday use of credit cards, digital 
devices, and the internet were coupled with emerging fears and uncertainty. The inBloom initiative also 
contended with a history of school data used as punitive measures of education reform rather than construc-
tive resources for teachers and students. InBloom therefore served as an unfortunate test case for emerging 
concerns about data privacy coupled with entrenched suspicion of education data and reform.
What Went Wrong?
InBloom did not lack talent, resources, or great ideas, but throughout its brief history, the organization and 
the product seemed to embody contradictory business models, software development approaches, philos-
ophies, and cultures. There was a clash between Silicon Valley-style agile software development methods 
and the slower moving, more risk-averse approaches of states and school districts. At times, it was as 
though a team of brilliant thinkers had harvested every “best practice” or innovative idea in technology, 
business, and education—but failed to whittle them down to a manageable and cohesive strategy. Despite 
the Gates Foundation’s ongoing national involvement with schools, the inBloom initiative seemed to not 
anticipate the multiple layers of politics and bureaucracy within the school system. Instead there were 
expectations that educational reform would be easily accomplished, with immediate results, or that – worst 
case – there would be an opportunity to simply fail fast and iterate. 
However, the development of inBloom was large-scale and public, leaving little room to iterate or quietly 
build a base of case studies to communicate its value and vision. Thus, when vocal opposition raised 
concerns about student data use potentially harming children’s future prospects or being sold to third 
parties for targeted advertising, the initiative was caught without a strong counter-position. As opposition 
www.datasociety.net 
The Legacy of inBloom   5
mounted, participating states succumbed to pressure from advocacy groups and parents and, one by one, 
dropped out of the consortium.
The Legacy of InBloom
Although inBloom closed in 2014, it ignited a public discussion of student data privacy that resulted in the 
introduction of over 400 pieces of state-level legislation. The fervor over inBloom showed that policies 
and procedures were not yet where they needed to be for schools to engage in data-informed instruction. 
Industry members responded with a student data privacy pledge that detailed responsible practice. A 
strengthened awareness of the need for transparent data practices among nearly all of the involved actors 
is one of inBloom’s most obvious legacies. 
Instead of a large-scale, open source platform that was a multi-state collaboration, the trend in data-driven 
educational technologies since inBloom’s closure has been toward closed, proprietary systems, adopted 
piecemeal. To date, no large-scale educational technology initiative has succeeded in American K-12 
schools. This study explores several factors that contributed to the demise of inBloom and a number of 
important questions:  What were the values and plans that drove inBloom to be designed the way it was? 
What were the concerns and movements that caused inBloom to run into resistance? How has the entire 
inBloom development impacted the future of edtech and student data? 
1.0 Introduction
In August 2011, Vicki Phillips, Director of the College-Ready Education Unit for the Bill and Melinda 
Gates Foundation, published an upbeat blog post titled “Shared Tools for Teachers? There’s an App for 
That!”1  In it, she introduces the Shared Learning Collaborative, a newly established consortium of nine 
states exploring potentials for a platform that would standardize data collection and storage, share links to 
instructional resources, and develop an API for shared standards across open educational software. Phillips 
describes it as a “huge app store—just for teachers—with the Netflix and Facebook capabilities we love 
the most.” The brief blog post contains terms that would become increasingly contentious as the platform 
moved forward—open source software, a shared platform of applications and tools, Wireless Generation, 
differentiated instruction, and teacher support. Notably absent were the terms “data” or “privacy.” One 
paragraph ends with “Pretty cool, huh?” and another with “…right now, we’re watching the magic happen.”
The enthusiasm of Phillips’ blog post did not end up being an accurate predictor of the project’s future. 
Although now synonymous with failure in the educational technology world, inBloom began as an 
ambitious vision by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation to improve the U.S. education system. During a 
CNN interview in November 2011, Bill Gates described a “crisis in education,” citing low scores on inter-
national tests, high dropout rates in inner city schools, and a mismatch between schooling and employer 
expectations. Gates shared his vision for a “system that spreads the best ways that teaching gets done” 
and asserted that “one on one teaching is kind of the ideal that you’d like to achieve, where you see 
1. “Shared Tools for Teachers? There’s an App for That!”, Impatient Optimists, accessed January 26, 2017, http://www.impatientopti-
mists.org/Posts/2011/08/Shared-Tools-for-Teachers.
Data & Society Research Institute
6
where they’re confused, you see where they’re bored and you’re tuning to that.”2  Earlier that year, the 
Gates Foundation had invested $83.3 million into the Shared Learning Collaborative for a one-year term to 
support the development of the platform that would become inBloom.3 
1.1 What was inBloom?
It’s difficult to understand what inBloom was and was planned to be. InBloom was the name of a technical 
infrastructure, a non-profit in charge of developing that infrastructure, and a public initiative aimed to fund 
and connect it all. Early discussions described a centralized data platform, a tool for teachers, improved 
security and standards for student data, a state-level consortium, and disruptive educational reform. When 
it was first funded, the core vision was an educational data platform that could harmonize student data 
already stored by schools and school districts in a multitude of formats (e.g., paper files, various software 
programs) across multiple locations (e.g., computers that were not connected to each other, offices, 
storage units). The aim was to provide a platform that would support the standardization of data storage 
and enable more productive use of student data by educators and administrators.  It would also serve as a 
platform for learning apps and a space to organize and link to learning resources.
However, the timing of the launch of inBloom in spring 2013 coincided with the beginnings of sustained 
national attention on the volume of personal data generated by the everyday use of credit cards, digital 
devices, and the internet. In the summer of 2013, Edward Snowden disclosed evidence that the U.S. 
National Security Agency had accessed phone records and internet communication data for millions of 
Americans.4  Later that year, Target, a major retail company, suffered a data breach of credit card informa-
tion affecting an estimated 70 million customers.5  These and other events stirred concerns and uncertainty 
around data, a seeming black box of personal information with opaque uses that could be damaging or 
dangerous. This new mistrust of data, combined with historical anxieties about national testing regimes, 
mobilized a vocal group of advocates who suspected large philanthropies, such as the Bill and Melinda 
Gates Foundation, of attempting to privatize education.6 
Especially well-resourced for an educational initiative7  and supported by what has been described as a 
“dream team” of programmers and engineers, inBloom started with commitments from 9 states, including 
major school districts such as New York City. Yet barely over a year after its public launch, in April 2014, 
inBloom announced its closure. The question of “what went wrong” has been endlessly discussed in news 
articles, blogs, conferences, and post-mortems. The goal of this report is to deepen such discussions 
through new research and analysis.  Examined in this report are several reasons for inBloom’s failure and 
what key factors may have led to its demise. As poet Jack Gilbert notes “Everyone forgets that Icarus 
2. See transcript of Bill Gates interviewed by Fareed Zakaria, CNN, November 6, 2011, http://www.cnn.com/TRANSCRIPTS/1111/06/
fzgps.01.html.
3. “How We Work Grant,” Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, accessed January 26, 2017, http://www.gatesfoundation.org/How-We-
Work/Quick-Links/Grants-Database/Grants/2011/07/OPP1041367.
4. Mirren Gidda, “Edward Snowden and the NSA files-timeline,” The Guardian, August 21, 2013, https://www.theguardian.com/
world/2013/jun/23/edward-snowden-nsa-files-timeline.
5. Maggie McGrath, “Target Data Breach Spilled Info On As Many As 70 Million Customers,” Forbes, January 10, 2014, http://www.
forbes.com/sites/maggiemcgrath/2014/01/10/target-data-breach-spilled-info-on-as-many-as-70-million-customers/#21193f856bd1.
6. Diane Ravitch, “I Am Puzzled by the Gates Foundation,” Diane Ravitch’s Blog, accessed January 26, 2017, https://dianeravitch.
net/2012/07/05/i-am-puzzled-by-the-gates-foundation/.
7. InBloom received $100 million in combined funding from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation and Carnegie Corporation.
www.datasociety.net 
The Legacy of inBloom   7
also flew,” and with that sentiment, this study also explores inBloom’s positive legacy—what it got right in 
exploring the potential for disruptive change in education and catalyzing a necessary discussion of student 
data use.
1.2 Methods
Between October 2015 and December 2016, researchers interviewed 18 key actors who were involved in 
the Shared Learning Infrastructure (SLI)/ Shared Learning Collaborative (SLC)/ inBloom initiative during 
the period from March 2010 to June 2014. Interview participants included administrators from school 
districts and state-level departments of education, major technology companies, former Gates Founda-
tion and inBloom employees, parent advocates, parents, student data privacy experts, programmers, and 
engineers. Participants were selected for interviews based on snowball sampling of experts known to the 
research team, or identified via literature review or recommendations from external experts and interview 
participants. Interviews lasted between one and two hours and followed a 12-item semi-structured inter-
view protocol that was adapted to address key areas of expertise, for example extensive policy or technical 
knowledge. Participants were invited to the study via email or face-to-face and interviews were conducted 
by Skype or phone.
2.0 inBloom’s Story
The decision for inBloom to be designed as centralized, open source, and national in scale was influenced 
by several factors. For one, Bill Gates’ attitudes toward an American educational crisis matched with 
existing worries about the condition of U.S. school systems, and renewed public excitement about the 
powerful abilities of new technologies. InBloom’s release also coincided with the availability of federal Race 
To The Top (RTTT) funding. Lastly, the inBloom platform inherited both staff and concepts from previous 
platforms—most notably, the Achievement Reporting and Innovation System (ARIS), created for New York 
City schools in partnership with IBM and edtech company Wireless Generation. The result of these influ-
ences was that inBloom was a platform with an identity crisis. The internal culture clash between agile start-
up, established enterprise software vendor, and shared community-driven platform laid the groundwork for 
a number of conflicts and discrepancies.
2.1 Edtech Evangelists
Bill Gates’ statements about education in 2011 reflected a broader public attitude about the relationship 
between education and technology. And as American schools were being criticized, new technologies 
and techniques were being proposed as potential saviors. Such attitudes are illustrated in the findings of a 
2009 report by McKinsey & Company.8  The report identifies a “persistent gap in academic achievement,” 
reportedly “depriving the U.S. economy of as much as $2.3 trillion in economic output in 2008.”9  The 
8. McKinsey & Company “The Economic Impact of the Achievement Gap in America’s Schools,” April, 2009, http://mckinseyonsociety.
com/downloads/reports/Education/achievement_gap_report.pdf.
9. Byron G. Auguste, Bryan Hancock, and Martha Laboissiere, “The economic cost of the U.S. education gap,” McKinsey Quarterly, 
June 2009, http://www.mckinsey.com/industries/social-sector/our-insights/the-economic-cost-of-the-us-education-gap.
Data & Society Research Institute
8
report concluded that children were not meeting their full potential and that investment in high-quality 
teaching could improve academic achievement outcomes. The authors of the report advocated for strong 
metrics, in the form of testing, and aggressive interventions based on data analysis, to turn around the 
failing education system.
Writing in 2012 for the Harvard Business Review, Stacy Childress, then Deputy Director of Education for 
the Gates Foundation, connects the dots between McKinsey’s report and Gates-funded educational 
reform initiatives. Childress points out the “dismal” performance of U.S. high school seniors on the 
National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP), reporting that at least 70% of students scored 
below proficient in mathematics, reading or science.10  She details the negative impacts these scores have 
on students’ career and self-sufficiency prospects, as well as the decline of U.S. international rankings in 
student achievement. Childress urges for a combined focus on improving teacher quality and accelerating 
adoption of technologies in the classroom—specifically data-driven personalized learning.11  For Childress 
and other advocates of data-driven learning, the focus was on the importance of collecting and tracking 
granular data about student performance. This wasn’t an initiative to simply create better lessons, it was 
a system to dynamically respond to the individual needs of each student using it. Therefore, the goal of 
personalization was coupled with the method of data collection. 
Childress also points to the success of several Gates-supported initiatives, including: Khan Academy (which 
at the time had 2,700 tutorial video lessons and 3 million unique users each month), Dreambox Learning 
(a personalized math program), School of One in New York (in which students received a personalized 
schedule each day according to their needs), and Rocketship Education in California (offering a hybrid of 
digital and teacher-facilitated instruction in math and reading).
For many education technology evangelists, the early 2010’s felt like their time had come. Ideas for trans-
forming teaching and learning, such as flipped classrooms, content recommendation engines, and person-
alized learning, had been percolating for years, but now, given more computing power and connectivity 
at lower costs, edtech at last seemed up to the task. As Aimee Guidera, President and CEO, Data Quality 
Campaign observes: 
The storyline had not gotten to what we all had thought was going to be the game-changer, which 
is how do you actually use individual student information to guide teaching and learning and to 
really leverage the power of this information to help teachers tailor learning to every single child 
in their class. That’s what made inBloom revolutionary.
The 2012 Global Silicon Valley (GSV) report American Revolution 2.0 described several catalysts in 
technology market dynamics that were poised to revolutionize education: the scalability of cloud 
computing and other technologies, cost reductions of open source software and content, high bandwidth 
and ubiquitous connectivity of wired classrooms, affordable hardware and software, mobile devices, and 
increasing signs of network effects. An October 2012 Forbes article12 cited their own list of innovations 
10. Stacey Childress, “Rethinking School,” Harvard Business Review, March, 2012, https://hbr.org/2012/03/rethinking-school.
11. The core of Childress’ argument, and that of the 2009 McKinsey report is that: a) schools are failing American students by not 
offering a high quality education that fosters their potential, and b) a combination of testing, technology (with a focus on data-driven 
personalized learning), and infrastructural change (e.g., charter schools) promise an improved future. This perspective surfaced frequently 
in interviews, particularly the expectation that student data could drive improvements in instruction and that more personalized learning 
experiences could improve academic achievement.
12. Eric Savitz, “5 School Technologies To Watch: Personalized Learning Is Here,” Forbes, October 22, 2012, http://www.forbes.com/
sites/ciocentral/2012/10/22/5-school-technologies-to-watch-personalized-learning-is-here/#12d717996c8c.
www.datasociety.net 
The Legacy of inBloom   9
in personalized learning: moving to the cloud and collaborative environments, cross-platform integration, 
vendor collaboration and the rise of the marketplace, the explosion of all things mobile, an emphasis on 
adaptive learning, and gamification. Technology proponents characterized the education sector as a last 
frontier, both for innovative change and as an enormous business opportunity. The American Revolution 2.0 
report estimated the value of the K-12 education market to be over $2.2 trillion13 and described it as largely 
untapped by technology-enabled innovation. As Forbes put it, “The 2012-2013 school year is certain to usher 
in new digital tools and different teaching approaches. Only time will tell which technologies will have the 
greatest impact on education and the learning lives of students, but one thing is certain – the path to person-
alized learning begins now.” This was the market context in which inBloom seemed both perfectly timed 
and well placed within a constellation of maturing and ever more affordable technologies, education policy 
objectives, budgetary pressures, and funding opportunities.
InBloom would eventually be designed to incorporate many of the technological innovations cited in the 
Forbes article and American Revolution 2.0 report. InBloom was developed with open source software, used 
cloud computing, relied on ubiquitous connectivity and device interoperability, enabled cross-platform 
integration and collaboration, intended to spark vendor competition through an app-store marketplace, 
and above all, aimed to open the door to personalized learning, which would “bring educational materials 
directly to teachers’ fingertips so that they can quickly find the materials, tools and strategies to help them 
meet students’ individual learning needs.”14  Assistant Superintendent James Yap, of New York’s Warwick 
Valley Central School District, explained, “The promise was that it was supposed to be adaptive differenti-
ated instruction for individual students, based on test results and other data that the states had. InBloom 
was going to provide different resources based on those results.” Greg Mortimer, former Chief Information 
Officer of Jefferson County School District, a Phase 1 participant in the inBloom pilot, outlined the value 
proposition as one of bridging systems and presenting relevant information in the right context at the right 
time, “The classic challenge everybody in K-12 talks about is we have data from all these disparate systems. 
How do we grab that data in a timely fashion and use it to inform instruction and hope we move the needle 
with student achievement?” However, despite the enthusiasm for the new possibilities of data, inBloom 
would also have to grapple with the complexities of existing infrastructures of education and edtech.
2.2 Platform in Search of Disruption 
InBloom was not the first attempt to use technology and data techniques to connect and improve educa-
tional settings. In particular, inBloom’s design inherited much from earlier work on and individuals involved 
with the ARIS platform in New York City, and the edtech firm Wireless Generation. These influences 
informed the adoption of a centralized platform model, where inBloom attempted to serve as a clearing 
house for educational data across a consortium of states. 
In 2007, the New York City school district worked with IBM and Wireless Generation to develop and adopt 
a system to collect student data. The system, funded for $80 million, was titled Achievement Reporting 
and Innovation System (ARIS). In a 2007 case study15  published by Stacy Childress, then lecturer at Harvard 
Business School, ARIS was described as a key mechanism to drive transparency and accountability. Yet 
13. This estimated value encompasses the market as a whole and includes expenditures such as salaries and facilities.
14. Accessed via the Wayback Machine on December 15, 2016: http://slcedu.org/instructional-impact/personalized-learning.
15. Stacey Childress, Focusing on Results at the New York City Department of Education, Harvard Business School, 2007, PEL-054.
Data & Society Research Institute
10
much controversy eventually engulfed ARIS. The system’s high cost, difficulty of use, redundancy with other 
systems, and low number of active users were factors cited by ARIS critics and in a January 2012 audit by 
New York City Comptroller John Liu:
The audit  despite spending more than $80 million on system design and development, DOE lacks 
effective measurements for gauging whether ARIS is an effective tool for enhancing and improving 
student performance. In addition, educators are not using ARIS to the extent for which it was 
intended. According to our survey of teachers and principals, many educators are not using the 
ARIS system to collaborate with other teachers as was intended, are using alternative computer 
systems to obtain information in place of, or in conjunction with, ARIS, and are not utilizing the 
system to its fullest extent. Therefore, we believe that DOE is not completely attaining all the 
benefits for which the ARIS system was intended.16 
By July 2012, documents from the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) and New York State 
Education Department (NYSED) suggested that ARIS would be replaced by a new statewide database 
being developed with federal education funding.17 ARIS survived until November 2014 when, under 
a different administration, NYCDOE announced that ARIS would be replaced by a home-grown data 
management system under development.
After the initial development of ARIS (but before its eventual closure), the CEO and VP of Wireless Genera-
tion were continuing to develop their ideas about the role of technology in education. In 2008, Larry Berger 
(CEO) and David Stevenson (VP) co-authored Slow Entry, Distant Exit, a paper describing eleven barriers to 
entry (and innovation) in the K-12 education market. Among the barriers Berger and Stevenson cited were, 
“oligopoly and decentralization.” With so many school districts spread across the U.S., few companies 
had the workforce required to connect with disparate decision-makers, which contributed to “three major 
publishers controlling almost 85 percent of the K-12 textbook market.” Berger and Stevenson criticized 
technology philanthropists as being part of the problem: “One irony of the current fashion in K-12 philan-
thropy is that the same entrepreneurs who made fortunes...through highly centralized systems that crushed 
local variation...have tended to focus on educational entrepreneurship in the form of local, decentralized, 
often boutique entities.” 
Berger and Stevenson recommended that the education market could “achieve scale and collaboration 
by forming consortia.” The authors suggested that a “consortium model not only pools resources, but it 
signals to the entrepreneur that this is a problem for which many customers beyond the consortium may 
be seeking a solution…” The paper also described how savings in the shared adoption of open source 
software and materials might free up scarce resources for other services and purposes. These values 
shaped the development of the technology that would become the base of inBloom.
By 2010, Wireless Generation was developing the concept of a technology platform to share with the 
Gates Foundation. According to a former Wireless Generation employee interviewed for this study,18  the 
initial concept envisioned a services layer integrating and encapsulating four core components: a data 
16. City of New York Office of the Comptroller, “Audit Report on the Performance of the New York City Department of Educa-
tion’s Achievement Reporting and Innovation System,” January 23, 2012, https://comptroller.nyc.gov/wp-content/uploads/docu-
ments/7I11_118A.pdf.
17. Jill Colvin and Amy Zimmer, “City’s $80M Student Data System To Be Replaced by State Portal,” DNAINFO, July 30, 2012, https://
www.dnainfo.com/new-york/20120730/new-york-city/citys-80m-student-data-system-be-replaced-by-state-portal.
18. A former Wireless Generation employee requested anonymity as condition of interview.
www.datasociety.net 
The Legacy of inBloom   11
warehouse, a universal lesson bank, a universal item bank, and a learning trajectory map. The codename 
for this big idea, designed to dislodge barriers to innovation in education, was “Baselayer”—and would go 
on to be renamed the Shared Learning Infrastructure (SLI). By this point, Stacey Childress had moved from 
Harvard Business School to lead the education initiative at the Gates Foundation, and was exchanging 
ideas with Larry Berger and colleagues at Wireless Generation in preparation for a meeting with a select 
group of technologists, education experts, and power brokers, including Bill Gates. 
According to a former Wireless Generation employee, even as these earliest seeds for inBloom were being 
planted, many concerns and risks were identified.19 It was during this same period that a strategy was dis-
cussed for how to extend a foundation investment with the expectation that Race To The Top federal funds 
for Instructional Improvement Systems could be leveraged. Thus, Baselayer, and then SLI, was saddled with 
many known risks, borrowed elements from ARIS, aligned to RTTT funding, and remained in search of a 
consortium to champion a platform solution.
2.3 An Uneasy Alliance: Race to the Top and Consortium of States
From 2010 through 2015, $4.35 billion in federal grant funding was available to states via the Race to the 
Top program. There were various program criteria aligned to key policy objectives but among the most 
relevant to education technology vendors and products were awards for “data systems to support instruc-
tion,” including “fully implementing statewide longitudinal data systems, using data to improve instruction, 
and accessing and using state data.” Inevitably, this infusion of funding influenced the demand, direction, 
and scope of large education technology projects across the U.S., including projects involving and systems 
linking to inBloom. As Sharren Bates, a developer of the ARIS system while at the NYDOE, a former Senior 
Program Officer at the Gates Foundation, and Product Manager for inBloom described it, “If you were to 
ask me if I were to do it again, to try to work with states and districts together, if I would do it the same way, 
I would say with Race to the Top funding on the table, yes. If Race to the Top hadn’t been on the table, 
then no. But it would have been irresponsible to have a data infrastructure conversation with hundreds of 
millions of dollars going to states without talking to them.”
The vision of inBloom and RTTT objectives were not entirely out of sync, but the nature of complex govern-
ment procurement entangling federal, state, and local agencies, competing priorities, and layers of public 
sector oversight and accountability20  often chafed against inBloom’s preferred methodologies of software 
development. Ideally inBloom might have had a chance to quietly prototype, test, and pilot components or 
stripped down versions of the datastore, but instead the trajectory veered toward a very visible, big bang 
launch within a highly compressed timeline. As Iwan Streichenberger, former CEO of inBloom recalled the 
strategy of the Gates Foundation: 
inBloom has to scale fast. It’s a big, heavy, large-scale project, with a large initial investment. 
It builds on the promises and commitments made by inBloom predecessor, the SLC, to early 
adopting states such as New York, guaranteeing them very high security and profound changes in 
data management in a compressed timeframe. The belief is that it can’t be designed small so we 
19. Questions about reducing integration costs, achieving data interoperability, state participation in open systems, the choice of a 
platform vs. mere standards or toolkits, how to minimize the scope of a platform, should a system be centralized, and expectations for 
personalized learning were raised from the start.
20. For a detailed analysis of the complexity of the procurement process in education, see: Steven Hodas, Redesigning the District 
Operating System, CRPE, May, 2015, http://www.crpe.org/sites/default/files/crpe-report-redesigning-dos.pdf.
Data & Society Research Institute
12
have to go big. A big visible launch is planned to solidify the commitments previously made and 
send messages to the industry players that things are changing and exciting times are ahead. It is 
also a way for the project sponsors to demonstrate their commitment to the long term ambitious 
vision and their large investment in better data interoperability across the industry.
Streichenberger reflected that, “Interestingly, this goes against most modern product and company launch 
concepts such as ‘test and learn’ or in more simple terms ‘walk before you run.’ As a CEO and entrepre-
neur, I was more used to and comfortable with the ideas of coming up with a Minimum Viable Product and 
scaling up. But inBloom was a different beast with a legacy and a somewhat unique positioning.” 
There were multiple factors driving inBloom’s go big approach. Above all, inBloom needed to be an enter-
prise scale system in order to process the volume of data anticipated across the country from state and 
district partners with an expectation of continued growth. And as Streichenberger said, it needed to offer 
high security at scale on day one, adding to the development complexity. InBloom had also become inter-
dependent with state and district projects and timelines, many driven by federal RTTT funding with strings 
attached. Lastly, inBloom raised expectations with a highly visible launch featuring Bill Gates at the South 
By Southwest Education Conference in March 2013.
In addition to developing, scaling, and rolling out the massive, built from scratch cloud-based datastore, 
inBloom faced the challenge of convincing other software companies to change course and join their 
revolution. Many vendors were already dominant or successful in the existing education technology market 
and faced substantial costs and risks investing in new or modified products that could interoperate with 
inBloom’s datastore. As Sharren Bates described it, “We needed to prove the utility could exist in order 
to have vendors buy into it. So I’m not suggesting that the size of our build was wrong. I mean it’s wrong 
around the edges, we could have done a little bit less. But to prove that we were a utility that could work at 
scale, we needed to build the whole thing. You can’t build half a boat. You’ll sink.”
As partners, software vendors were not only concerned about whether inBloom would succeed, but also 
how the cloud-based datastore could threaten existing business relationships and revenue in the event of 
such a paradigm shift. Student Information System (SIS) vendors generally exercised control over student 
data for their school district clients. Managing, processing, and safeguarding student data was part of the 
SIS vendor value proposition to schools. But inBloom’s model shifted and blurred the boundaries of data 
“ownership” and management. A senior technical expert who has closely examined the history of inBloom 
characterized the vendor perspective: “Right now the SIS’s are owned by us and you’re going to disin-
termediate us from our own SIS’s and start trying to charge rent on that? Before inBloom was killed, they 
were already dying on the buy-in because the vendor community was not interested in a disintermediated 
relationship with their data.” 
Proposed benefits of the centralized model included ease of aggregate data analysis across district 
and state boundaries to inform research, teaching, and learning, to the extent that a bigger data set 
provided correspondingly greater value. But district and school level priorities, aside from federal and 
state reporting, did not typically align with a top down approach. School district and regional CIOs and 
executives were accustomed to having a high degree of hands-on control, albeit often through their 
chosen vendors, over student data. As James Peterson, Chief Technology Officer for the Bloomington 
School District in Illinois, recalled of exchanges with inBloom, “The number one thing was we were trying 
www.datasociety.net 
The Legacy of inBloom   13
to encourage them to make this available to people to be able to stand up in their own stacks. I think their 
response was ‘We’re not going to have 50 instances of inBloom around the country.’ And we were just kind 
of like ‘Well, you’re probably not going to have one.’ Because this thing’s not going to get far.” A senior 
technical expert who has closely examined the history of inBloom recalled receiving conflicting directions 
about the architecture, “We’re not federating yet,” referring to allowing independently hosted iterations of 
the system, “That’s for the future. We’re not sure if we’ll ever do it, but it’s central data.” 
Yet another aspect of inBloom reflective of an internal culture clash would be the technology choices 
made. While inBloom aspired to tap into many innovative technologies, some observers felt that early 
choices in software architecture undermined the chances of delivering a robust, secure, enterprise-scaled 
system on an aggressive development timeline. Choosing Mongo DB for development fulfilled inBloom’s 
promise of an open source software based system, but the choice also required stretching the relatively 
new, “NoSQL” database software to an unprecedented level of complexity, functionality, and scale.21  
It wasn’t only the technologies inBloom was using, but also the monetization scheme that felt more like 
a start-up than an established educational consortium. In response to questions about pricing, news 
accounts and findings from our interviews indicated that inBloom representatives cited a range of $2 to $5 
per student, sometimes suggesting the final number would depend on the overall number of users. While 
it is normal for start-ups to iterate a business model as they better understand the market, stakeholders 
reported that doing so in public only exacerbated doubts about the viability and transparency of their 
market strategy.
3.0 Changing Perspectives of Data
As inBloom was developed and deployed, it came into conflict with a new public focus on the vulnerability 
of data systems and trustworthiness of corporations and government. A steady stream of news reports on 
large scale hacking, leaking, and theft of data, including personally identifiable information or “PII,” fueled 
a growing public anxiety about privacy and security in an ever more online, interconnected, and digitized 
world. Coupled with the concerted efforts of a number of vocal opponents, this general mistrust of data set 
the stage for inBloom losing the support of its consortium of member states.
3.1 Growing Mistrust of Data Use and Government
The WikiLeaks saga of 2010 was one of the first global news stories about hacking sensitive information 
that captured the public imagination. The volume of information and major foreign policy issues ensured 
ongoing coverage, but that story was about government documents or “cables,” senior officials, and 
statecraft, not about how big data affected ordinary people. In 2013, NSA contractor and self-professed 
21. A senior technical expert who has closely examined the history of inBloom recalled, “They chose to implement a Mongo DB 
database for this thing. And that was ridiculous. It was ridiculous. That was a technology architect who’s ‘Uh, sure we haven’t done one 
of those before. Let’s try that.’ Literally they’d never done one before, so they didn’t know how it worked and they didn’t know what was 
happening so that was not wise.” Reflecting on these choices, the same expert said “We often get involved in new technology because 
if you’re not involved in new tech, you’re not in the game, but this was …a massive build on technology that was not proven. They should 
have been building off of a platform that was known and boring and uninteresting.”
Data & Society Research Institute
14
whistleblower Edward Snowden sparked another storm of media reports and public debates by revealing 
how government and corporate data tracking and aggregation made the surveillance and investigation of 
the general public possible.
Over the next few months, the public underwent a crash course on how online and mobile computing, 
from texts, email, and web surfing to clicks, swipes, and likes, left a trail of personal metadata available 
to harvest and analyze. The public was suddenly more aware and ready to have an extended conversa-
tion about appropriate access to and use of big data and PII. Aimee Guidera, CEO of the Data Quality 
Campaign described the emerging public conversation and concerns about data:
...the issue is inBloom and education data collection became nuclear and it became synonymous 
with Big Brother, Edward Snowden, Target, making teachers into robots, putting teachers out of 
business, social engineering, lack of parent control. They were all fearful words, and once that 
genie was out of the bottle, you couldn’t bring the conversation back. By the time the powerful 
stories that should have been how they introduced the story started getting out, it was too far 
gone in the public awareness, and the public opinion battles had already been lost.
As public awareness about data and privacy grew, so too did concerns about overreach by the private 
sector. In 2013 the U.S. Federal Trade Commission announced an inquiry into whether Facebook’s new 
privacy policies were in violation of a 2011 agreement. Under the prior agreement with regulators, Face-
book needed to get explicit user consent before exposing private information to new audiences. Such 
negotiations between users, regulators, and companies trying to monetize user data, were becoming  
more common and more complicated, albeit with little consistency or clarity across different services.
During the 2013 holiday shopping season, Target revealed that 40 million customer accounts had been 
breached, including names, card numbers, expiration dates, and card verification values. To make matters 
worse, Target later revised the number up to about 70 million, raising doubts about the company’s level of 
awareness, control, and candidness. Soon the theme of data insecurity had become embedded into the 
news cycle. In early 2014, Neiman Marcus announced that as many as 1.1 million of their cardholders may 
have had data compromised before revising the number down to 350,000. In July 2014, New York Attorney 
General Eric Schneiderman issued a report stating that 22.8 million private records of New Yorkers had 
been exposed to data breaches over eight years, including over 3,000 businesses, nonprofits, and govern-
ment organizations. In September, Home Depot disclosed that hackers had accessed 56 million credit and 
debit cards, stolen 53 million email addresses, and installed malware on in store self-checkout systems. 
Throughout 2014, Kmart, Staples, Dairy Queen, UPS, JPMorgan Chase, Sony, Jimmy John’s, Michaels, and 
many other companies also reported significant data security failures with the potential to impact customer 
security and privacy. 
Following the great recession and the rise of the Tea Party and Occupy Wall Street, public trust in govern-
ment and corporations was already in decline. Former Jefferson County Colorado Public Schools CIO 
Greg Mortimer described how their inBloom pilot project became subsumed in an ever more contentious 
political environment:
InBloom was one of a couple items that were used as a political tool by the Tea Party to try to 
take control of the school board. Even during that time, we had teachers – including teachers who 
were officers in the union – presenting with us, and in fact being the key presenters to the board, 
www.datasociety.net 
The Legacy of inBloom   15
making passionate, really kind of poignant requests to say “Please help. Please support our efforts 
to move this forward.”
In 2010, Rupert Murdoch’s News Corp had paid $360 million for 90% of Wireless Generation—during the 
same period when it was developing the Baselayer designs. The acquisition came on the heels of News 
Corp’s hiring of former New York City Schools Chancellor Joel Klein to oversee their education initiatives. 
In November 2010, Murdoch had described the American education sector as a $500 billion market that 
was largely untapped. Meanwhile, across the pond, News Corp was engulfed in a phone hacking scandal 
culminating in Rupert and James Murdoch testifying before the British Parliament in July 2011 amidst 
mounting fines, arrests, and apologies. Given this backdrop of scandal and spin, critics questioning News 
Corp’s intentions for the U.S. education market found an ever more attentive and concerned audience. As 
Rob Curtin, Director of Higher Education for Microsoft, observed: 
In my opinion, they were accused and tried in the court of public opinion. Claiming that inBloom 
was a shell for corporations – notably Bill Gates’ Microsoft and Rupert Murdoch’s News Corp, to 
mine student data for some corporate benefit – made for shocking headlines. The reality, however, 
couldn’t have been further from the truth. InBloom was a non-profit funded by philanthropy at the 
request of the CCSSO. Ironically it offered greater security and more data-access controls than 
most school districts had at that time.
Former Jefferson County Schools Superintendent Cynthia Stevenson recalls, “I was shocked at all the 
people who hated the Gates Foundation. I mean they saw Bill Gates as right up there with Lucifer.” Sharren 
Bates describes an opposition member showing a presentation slide in which devil horns were drawn on 
Bill Gates.
The public messages of corporate actors like Gates did not always help the growing critiques. In 2013, 
Gates was the keynote speaker at South By Southwest in Austin, Texas following the announcement that 
the Gates Foundation had invested $100 million in a freshly rebranded inBloom. Gates pointed to a picture 
of Luke Skywalker under the tutelage of Yoda in the film Star Wars. Gates explained that Yoda was a great 
teacher because the Jedi master understood when Skywalker was losing interest: “The most evocative 
way to think about personalization is to conjure the image of Yoda giving Luke Skywalker one-on-one, 
Jedi-style attention for days on end in the swamps of Dagobah. When Luke gets confused, Yoda goes 
back and covers the material in a different way. When Luke gets bored, Yoda gives an example to make 
the lesson relevant. Yoda keeps Luke at the very edge of his learning curve, constantly.”22  Meeting the 
needs of real students proved more challenging than the idealized Jedi relationship and this pitch would 
ultimately be more attractive to technologists than parents and teachers.
In conjunction with negative press about corporate and government malfeasance and questionable use 
of data, inBloom was caught in a riptide of criticism about a wide range of education reform initiatives. 
Starting in 2010, over 40 states had begun adopting the Common Core curriculum standards with broad 
bipartisan support, but by 2014 the effort was under fire from political factions on both the left and the 
right across the country. Race to the Top funded programs, including student testing, teacher and school 
evaluation, and other measures, were attacked with similar themes of resisting big government and 
22. Bill Gates, “SXSW: Innovation and Technology in Education,” Gates Notes, March 7, 2013, https://www.gatesnotes.com/Education/
SXSW-Innovation-and-Technology-in-Education.
Data & Society Research Institute
16
retaining local control of schools emerging. Together, these interlocking story lines about the threat of big 
data to privacy and security and the specter of centralized authority created a rocky landscape for inBloom 
and its allies to navigate.
3.2 Dedicated Opposition
However one might characterize the people, organizations, issues, and tactics that collectively made up 
the coalition raising questions about inBloom, two things are clear: the opposition began early, and the 
central message that student data would be vulnerable and could be sold to third parties and could be 
used to inhibit kids’ future prospects was largely unchanged. The general atmosphere of data mistrust 
combined with earlier education reform movements that already characterized educational data as a 
means of harsh accountability. 
A leading opponent of inBloom, Leonie Haimson, founder of Class Size Matters, had previously critiqued 
the implementation of ARIS in New York. She recalls finding Phillips’ 2011 blog post description that an 
educational platform would function like Facebook deeply concerning. In October 2011, the Huffington 
Post published a blog post by Haimson, titled “Gates, In Alliance with Murdoch’s News Corp, Builds a New 
App for Corporate Education Reform?”23  Haimson’s post made a case for public skepticism and suspicion 
about the organizations, individuals, and motives driving the Shared Learning Collaborative. Haimson 
linked the newly announced Gates Foundation funded project to several recent controversies, including a 
failed New York State Education Department software procurement, an expensive and little used New York 
City Department of Education student data system, and the News Corp phone hacking scandal in the UK. 
In closing, she called for public vigilance framing the debate with themes that endured over the next two 
and half years:
Watch out for these data platforms and “collaborative” app stores. Watch out for the unholy 
alliance between Bill Gates, Rupert Murdoch and Joel Klein, ceaselessly devoted to expanding the 
educational-industrial-technological complex at the cost of real support to teachers and children. 
Watch out for more wasted money being spent on data systems that don’t help differentiate 
instruction, but that have huge potentials for abuse.
For Haimson and other activists, opposition to inBloom proceeded alongside resistance to other education 
reform policy debates. Diane Ravitch, an education historian and author of the 2010 book, The Death and 
Life of the Great American School System: How Testing and Choice Undermine Education, had become a 
national voice questioning corporate interests and their roles in education reform. Ravitch had served in the 
Clinton and George HW Bush administrations, and had gone from Common Core advocate to one of the 
fiercest critics of the proposed national curriculum standards. Ravitch said, “with the No Child Left Behind 
Act, schools became data-driven, not mission driven,”24  recommending instead an approach by Deborah 
Meier, that schools be “data-informed, not data-driven.”25  In many states and school districts, opponents  
of high stakes testing, Common Core standards, and teacher and school evaluation, found common ground 
with people concerned about student data privacy and security risks. Both groups expressed concerns about 
23. Leonie Haimson, “Gates, In Alliance with Murdoch’s News Corp, Builds a New App for Corporate Education Reform?” The Huffing-
ton Post, August 9, 2011, http://www.huffingtonpost.com/leonie-haimson/bill-gates-rupert-murdoch-impatient-optimists_b_920000.html.
24. Diane Ravitch, “Redefining Accountability, BookTalk event at Columbia University Teacher’s College, July 18, 2010, http://www.
tc.columbia.edu/articles/2010/july/redefining-accountability/.
25. Diane Ravitch, The Death and Life of the Great American School System (New York: Basic Books, 2010), 244.
www.datasociety.net 
The Legacy of inBloom   17
the experimental nature of these reforms and potential profit motives. In Jefferson County, Colorado, parent 
Rachel Stickland was quoted in the New York Times as saying, “It’s a new experiment in centralizing massive 
metadata on children to share with vendors and then the vendors will profit by marketing their learning 
products, their apps, their curriculum materials, their video games, back to our kids.” 26
Initially, Jefferson County stood apart from other inBloom pilot districts, demonstrating relatively unified 
support by school district officials and educators and developing widely shared explanatory materials about 
their inBloom project approach and objectives. But over time, a handful of parents mounted a strong show of 
local opposition. Former Jefferson County Schools Superintendent Cynthia Stevenson recalled:
It started with this one mother and it spread to a couple of our schools and they were schools with 
parents who were very active in ensuring that this stopped. And they were convinced that we were 
selling the data on their children and we would give it to all kinds of large organizations and their 
children would be ruined. I mean, I don’t know how else to put it. It was not rational.
Parents were not unanimously opposed to inBloom, though few parent advocates were as visible or as 
organized in their support as others were in opposition. Olga Garcia-Kaplan, a New York parent and 
blogger working in data science, initially had concerns about inBloom but as she came to understand the 
purpose and data security safeguards, she viewed inBloom as a “great opportunity.” Garcia-Kaplan felt 
that the information available to her about her children was limited and that inBloom would allow her to 
access pertinent information that the school held that would be useful for her and other parents to access 
and understand:
When inBloom said we’re connecting all of that so that you can see it, to me that was a great 
opportunity to have more insight into my kids’ school life and what their academic history was or 
where I could help or where the school was having successes with my kids and all these things and 
we just didn’t have that at all. There was nothing.
Meanwhile, opponents were increasingly concerned that the lack of answers could mean that their fears 
about the corporatization of education were founded. The lack of information coming from official channels 
likely increased skepticism. In trying to fill in the blanks based on the limited information available, some 
opponents came to the conclusion that powerful players, like Bill Gates, were intentionally obfuscating.
Both Haimson and Ravitch were already involved in the sphere of educational technology, but the 
arguments they picked, the targets they chose, and the support that they mobilized in response to 
inBloom honed in on the changing public data atmosphere. In April 2013, Haimson organized a Town 
Hall meeting for parents to discuss concerns about inBloom. The invitation, as posted on Diane Ravitch’s 
website, reflects fears about student data use and the corporatization of education:
Parents, do you know your child’s confidential, personal school records are going to be shared with 
a corporation called inBloom Inc?
This highly sensitive information will be stored on a data cloud and disclosed to for-profit corpora-
tions to help them develop and market their “learning products”
26. Natasha Singer, “Deciding Who Sees Students’ Data.” New York Times, October 5, 2013, http://www.nytimes.com/2013/10/06/busi-
ness/deciding-who-sees-students-data.html
Data & Society Research Institute
18
The data will include your child’s names, address, photo, email, test scores, grades, economic and 
racial status, and detailed disciplinary, health and special education records. 27
An article in EdSurge28  reported that while around 150 people attended, representatives from the Gates 
Foundation and inBloom were absent. Reporting of the meeting is consistent with observations expressed 
in our interviews. 
Across the states, opponents felt that education officials as well as inBloom representatives and partners 
repeatedly failed to address questions and concerns about student data privacy and security. When present 
at meetings, references to brief, often legalistic, statements and assurances about FERPA compliance only 
hardened opponents’ view that inBloom and their partners were aloof, secretive, and condescending. 
In April 2013, Audrey Watters, an educational technology blogger, posted a series of questions to inBloom 
and their responses on her blog “in an attempt to get some clarity over what inBloom will gather, how long 
it will store it, and what recourse parents have who want to opt out.”29  Responses from an inBloom spokes-
person did clarify some misconceptions, e.g., “inBloom is not creating a national database,” “inBloom 
discourages using social security numbers as student IDs,” “there is no public or third-party access to data 
unless it is authorized by a school district or state educational agency,” but also reflected that policies 
around student data use were still nascent and under development.
Aimee Guidera describes the context of communicating the value of student data to teachers and parents 
at the time of inBloom: “If people don’t have access to information and they’ve never gotten information 
in a timely way, in a context that answers their questions and tailors to their needs, then they’ve never really 
gotten any value out of data and as a result, if you don’t get value out of it and then on top of it you don’t 
trust it to not be used to hurt you, you’re not going to use it.” Several of our interviews echoed this lack of 
positive experience and understanding.
As a harbinger of a broader issue of distrust of experts and top-down interventions, a few interview partic-
ipants likened the backlash and distrust of inBloom to the anti-vaccination movement. Steven Hodas, 
Executive Director of the Office of Innovation for the New York City Department of Education 2012-2014 
summarizes this approach as a misunderstanding of risk, “where risk is perceived to be all negative, and 
not as uncertainty, but as a minefield.” Another interview participant explained “once you scare them they 
say, well anything that sounds scary, the opposite should be safe. When in fact that’s not how it works.” 
Another participant described “The activism around inBloom felt like anti-vaccination activism. Just fear. So 
friends of mine went to their first back to school night for their then kindergarten son in New York and were 
greeted at the door by anti-inBloom flyers.” 
Ultimately, there were never adequate assurances as to the safety of these data practices. In addition, 
inBloom representatives had difficulty in articulating what the concrete value would be for individual 
students. With public doubts about safety, and no clear success case to show, proponents of inBloom lost 
27. Diane Ravitch, “NYC Parent Meeting on inBloom and Student Privacy Tomorrow,” Diane Ravitch’s Blog, April 28, 2013, https://di-
aneravitch.net/2013/04/28/nyc-parent-meeting-on-inbloom-and-student-privacy-tomorrow/.
28. Elizabeth Woyke, “NYC Parents Raise Questions About InBloom,” EdSurge News, April 30, 2013, https://www.edsurge.com/
news/2013-04-30-nyc-parents-raise-questions-about-inbloom.
29. Audrey Watters, “More details on inBloom’s plans for student data,” Hack Education blog, April, 2013, http://hackeducation.
com/2013/04/04/inbloom-more-details.
www.datasociety.net 
The Legacy of inBloom   19
control of the narrative. Regardless of whether inBloom could have fulfilled its promise, without a clear 
narrative of its potential benefits for education, it failed.
4.0 The Trajectory of inBloom’s Decline
The inBloom initiative occurred during a historically tumultuous time for public understanding of data 
use. Developed in the midst of national and international struggles over the unexpected sharing of what 
was considered sensitive information, the inBloom initiative also contended with a history of data used in 
schools as punitive rather than constructive. Examining the rollout in 2013, we can see how this unfolded in 
the progressive loss of participating states from the Shared Learning Collaborative. As local individuals put 
pressure on politicians, states introduced legislation and made political commitments that progressively 
blocked inBloom’s adoption. And as inBloom’s prospects dwindled, New York City became a battleground 
for inBloom’s future. The progressive dropping away of participating states and the passage of the NYSED 
budget in March of 2014 effectively foreclosed the project for good.
4.1 From Many to Few
InBloom’s rollout in 2013 was characterized as a coalition of supportive, participating states. Following 
initial funding from the Gates Foundation, the Shared Learning Collaborative (SLC) and Shared Learning 
Initiative (SLI) were made credible and real through support of the Council of Chief State School Officers 
(CCSSO). Backing by the CCSSO was considered indicative of demand by their broad national member 
base of elementary school administrators and provided the scale and numbers necessary to make the 
inBloom concept viable. The CCSSO was an independent, non-partisan, member-based organization 
representing state educational leadership, not the federal government, providing what became a familiar, 
albeit ultimately ineffective, retort to criticisms about inBloom representing a top down approach imposed 
on states, districts, and schools. 
By January 2013, the SLC counted nine states – Colorado, Delaware, Georgia, Illinois, Kentucky, Louisiana, 
Massachusetts, New York, and North Carolina – representing over 11 million students. By February, five 
states had identified districts for pilot projects and one state, New York, had developed a substantial Race 
to the Top funded program, putting inBloom at the center of its conceptual and technical design. Even 
as many states were participating through one or a small number of pilot districts, the tally of supporting 
states increasingly became part of the narrative measuring inBloom’s progress and success. 
Within months, the initial coalition of nine states began to shrink rather than grow.30 In Louisiana, there 
were conflicting reports about districts using social security numbers to identify students and that this data 
was being sent through inBloom. In April 2013, following controversy and parent protests, State Superin-
tendent John White announced that Louisiana would pull out of the inBloom project.31  Initially, inBloom 
cited the need for further community engagement, rather than any data security issues, suggesting that 
30. Ben Kamisar, “InBloom Sputters Amid Concerns About Privacy of Student Data,” Education Week, January 7, 2014, http://www.
edweek.org/ew/articles/2014/01/08/15inbloom_ep.h33.html.
31. Andrew Ujifusa, “John White Withdraws Louisiana Student Data from inBloom,” Education Week, April 26, 2013, http://blogs.
edweek.org/edweek/state_edwatch/2013/04/john_white_backtracks_on_controversial_inbloom_deal_in_louisiana.html.
Data & Society Research Institute
20
Louisiana might rejoin the coalition at a later date to be determined. But soon other states, under pressure 
from their own constituents and political dynamics, began to distance themselves from inBloom.
In May 2013, Georgia schools Superintendent, Dr. John Barge, assured parents in a town hall meeting that 
he would not share student data with inBloom. Later in May, Reuters reporter Stephanie Simon revealed 
that many more states were distancing themselves from inBloom. First on May 11th, Simon tweeted that 
Delaware, Georgia, and Kentucky had no plans to share confidential, personally identifiable student data 
with inBloom. On May 29th, Simons confirmed in an article that Kentucky, Georgia, and Delaware had no 
intention of working with inBloom, while officials in Massachusetts and North Carolina were reportedly still 
evaluating the project and may never upload student data.32 On August 1st, Guilford County, the single 
pilot district in North Carolina, announced, without specifying reasons for their decision, that they would 
not proceed with inBloom. 
The shrinking coalition of states tarnished inBloom’s reputation and undermined an already challenging 
go-to-market strategy. A senior technical expert who has closely examined the history of inBloom 
noted a mismatch between the states, which were slow and bureaucratic versus the start-up mindset of 
inBloom’s teams:
The state partnership strategy was one that emerged. My opinion is, it was a huge mistake. 
Basically there was an impedence mismatch between the kind of company [inBloom] were trying 
to run which was an agile, small, fast start-up, and the kind of partners they had, which were state 
partners who would mediate and negotiate down into their institutions. So, they have enterprise 
partnership with an agile start-up, which is a bad idea. One group has extremely long timelines, 
very fixed, limited ability to adapt changes, lots of lead time. And then the other group launched 
to just sort of figure it out as they go along, adjust, make changes to meet the customer’s needs 
as they arise. You can’t run a company like that. 
Former inBloom CEO, Iwan Streichenberger recalls that inBloom inherited the SLC early mandate to 
work first and foremost at the state level, which he believes was a determining factor of the demise of the 
project. He observed that districts and schools leaders, as well as parents, have often had a trust deficit in 
state actors perceived as being too far from reality and sometimes influenced by political considerations.
By November 2013, Colorado’s Jefferson County, previously one of inBloom’s most enthusiastic pilot 
districts, announced that they too were severing ties with inBloom. Following a contentious election 
that featured student data privacy and security, and in the midst of an angry reaction to a statewide tax 
increase, three new school board members swept in as a new majority bloc opposed to the inBloom pilot.
Over a period of only seven months, from April to November 2013, the inBloom coalition of states had 
shrunk from nine to three with one of the three, Massachusetts, still “evaluating” the project. Meanwhile, 
Illinois remained active but had already shifted efforts and resources toward a homegrown federated 
model. New York remained publicly committed to inBloom, with the cloud-based datastore at the center of 
various statewide projects, but growing opposition was evident through vocal activist groups, uncoopera-
tive districts, and accumulating political alliances.
32. Stephanie Simon, “School database loses backers as parents balk over privacy,” Reuters, May 29, 2013, http://www.reuters.com/
article/us-usa-education-database-idUSBRE94S0YU20130529.
www.datasociety.net 
The Legacy of inBloom   21
4.2 Last Stand in New York
InBloom projects within different states and districts varied widely in scope, scale, and level of commit-
ment, but inBloom’s collaboration with the State of New York was unusual in several key ways. The New 
York State Department of Education (NYSED) partnership included a service level agreement (SLA) with 
inBloom and contracts binding vendors responsible for developing student data dashboards, an education 
data portal, and a content management system, to work with inBloom and to develop systems interop-
erable with the still under development inBloom datastore. This arrangement effectively led to stronger 
inBloom vendor partnerships. Lastly, NYSED’s inBloom projects relied on participation by all or most school 
districts across the state by design, tying eligibility for RTTT funding to participation in inBloom projects. 
But New York was also home to the most vocal and organized opposition to inBloom, including Leonie 
Haimson, Diane Ravitch, parent activists, and over time, an increasing number of educators and school 
district officials, including the United Federation of Teachers (UFT), a union representing most non-supervi-
sory New York City teachers.
Here, Haimson and her allies were willing to sacrifice time and energy to battle inBloom, as she recalled 
the results, “it really was a testament to what parents can do with no resources, no funding, no organized 
support, and very little information.” Over time, more New York parents became aware of and concerned 
about inBloom and they expressed their fears to elected officials, school boards, teachers, and administra-
tors. Pleasantville School District Superintendent Mary Fox Alter recalled how multiple education reform 
initiatives came to intersect in NYSED’s use of inBloom but did not add up for her at the local level, stating 
that an initial factor that led to inBloom’s demise was a “flawed implementation model for the Common 
Core in New York”: 
The Common Core in New York involved a teacher evaluation system, Common Core curriculum 
materials that were being built as the plane flew in the sky and a data dashboard system that was 
supposed to track all of this, and new tests that were data dark to us. So the implementation plan 
for all of this in New York contained those four elements. The data dashboard was one of the four, 
the other three were fatally flawed.
By the fall of 2013, inBloom had become a political flashpoint on several fronts in New York. In September, 
two of three leading Democratic candidates for Mayor, including eventual winner Bill de Blasio, weighed 
in against the student data sharing scheme.33  De Blasio stated that, “As mayor, I will protect students’ 
privacy and stop this needless invasion of privacy.” As the largest school district in the U.S., NYC schools is 
comprised of 1.1 million of New York State’s 2.7 million students. Without NYC, inBloom faced a dramatic 
decrease in project scale. And throughout the fall of 2013, other school districts across the state began 
making requests to NYSED to opt out of the inBloom project even if it meant sacrificing their district’s RTTT 
funding. By the end of the year, approximately 40 districts had formally submitted opt-out requests. 
The New York State legislature was also feeling pressure from parents, activists, educators, and school 
district officials concerned about or opposed to inBloom. In December 2013, NYSED Commissioner John 
King received a letter from New York Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver and New York Assembly Education 
Chair Catherine Nolan signed by 50 Assembly Democrats requesting that NYSED withhold sharing student 
33. Rachel Monahan, “Two of the three democratic candidates would fight against giving kids’ records to private companies,” NY 
Daily News, September 4, 2013, http://www.nydailynews.com/new-york/mayoral-hopefuls-fight-kids-records-reaching-companies-arti-
cle-1.1445025.
Data & Society Research Institute
22
data with inBloom. During the same month UFT called upon the state to terminate their contract with 
inBloom. UFT Vice President Catalina Fortino testified before the state Assembly Education Committee 
stating, “the UFT is not opposed to gathering data on public school students; in fact, it’s a valuable tool,” 
but added that “releasing sensitive, student-identifying data points in 400 categories…” and “share[ing] 
some or all of that information with private companies” was problematic, concluding with, “how can we 
possibly countenance that?”
Meanwhile, earlier in November, a group of New York City parents had filed a lawsuit against NYSED sharing 
student data with inBloom that was dismissed by the New York Supreme Court in early February. However, 
the court victory was only a brief respite for NYSED and inBloom as the final blow came just weeks later 
in March when the state legislature approved a 2014-2015 state budget with some unusual fine print. The 
budget included a clause making it illegal for the state to share personally identifiable student data with any 
shared learning infrastructure service provider via a private, cloud-based, or state operated student datastore. 
With a strict barrier between inBloom and state participation from its largest coalition member, the future of 
the platform was effectively sealed. It would announce its closure just one month later.
5.0 Diagnosis of inBloom’s Closure
5.1 The Communication Response: An Argument Lacking a Vision
Despite the Gates Foundation’s ongoing national involvement with schools as part of its support for 
the Common Core, it seems unlikely that they anticipated the multi-layered, complex, often fraught 
relationships involved in the inBloom implementation. The large resource investments made by the 
Gates Foundation failed to build sufficient trust with the networks and actors involved. Trust was one of 
the most frequently used words in our interviews, reflecting a core need that many felt was absent. Trust 
between states and districts, between districts and teachers, between parents and states, and teachers 
and technology was not adequately addressed by inBloom’s communication strategy. Pleasantville School 
District Superintendent Mary Fox Alter describes the layers of trust needed to foster support and buy-in for 
the idea of inBloom: 
They have to build trust with the public school districts that are responsible for educating the 
children in the state of New York. The original Race to the Top model here in New York was created 
without one ounce of input from the public school districts so if you’re going to build whatever the 
initiative is, you have to build trust. 
Fox Alter further addressed the need to build trust with families: “You have to put up a real argument, a 
convincing argument for change and why this is good for children and families. And that was missing.”
Sharren Bates reflects that “inBloom did not have a privacy problem, inBloom did not have a parent 
problem. InBloom had an advocacy and perception problem.” Instead of seeking to build trust at the 
district level with teachers and parents, many interview participants observed that inBloom and the Gates 
Foundation responded to what were very emotional concerns with complex technical descriptions or legal 
defenses. Jeff Alderson, former Lead Architect at Houghton Mifflin Harcourt (formerly Choice Solutions) 
and the technical architect for the New York implementation of inBloom observed:
www.datasociety.net 
The Legacy of inBloom   23
Parents don’t want to hear from the technologist about data privacy and security, ironically. If you 
look at the transcripts of every time that inBloom was in front of legislature or in front of a PTA 
meeting or something like that, they always tried to answer an emotionally charged question with 
a non-emotional technical answer.  That is the worst thing you could possibly do. All that did was 
just stir the pot and alienate the parent community.
Tom Dunn, New York State Education Department Communications Director from the summer of 2009 to 
the winter of 2016, further described: “Even the people that districts sent to this were their data people. 
They weren’t their instructional people, they weren’t their curriculum people. It operated strictly in the 
data world.”
Part of this response seemed a valid approach to dispel misunderstandings where parents were not aware 
of existing student data practices and representatives of inBloom and the school districts sought to clarify 
where they were introducing new practice. Sharren Bates says that when she tried to “describe what FERPA 
protects, what the law protects, and what school districts already do with student data to support educa-
tion and decision-making,” the response she received was that opponents were not aware of these legal 
and administrative practices. Bates further describes: “The law’s very clear and we were actually imple-
menting software to support those needs probably stronger than anywhere else than any school district 
in the country.” But for the most part, the technical and legal response exacerbated suspicion around 
inBloom and failed to communicate its value.
One interview participant who worked with the New York State implementation of inBloom described that 
inBloom staff who attended school district meetings seemed unapproachable: “They would just show up 
right when the event started in black suits, sit in the back and they’d be on their laptops, or headphones 
in, not really engaging in the conversations.” The participant further recalls that “they were very hesitant to 
proactively put any content or information out,” which contributed to a reactive stance, rather than better 
controlling the narrative.
InBloom’s communication materials and messaging were developed by consultants rather than in-house 
experts and explained the technology solution without conveying any useful purpose, thus failing to 
communicate a compelling value proposition to teachers, parents, and students. This approach led to 
conversations and questions about how the technology worked instead of big picture discussions about 
how inBloom could help students. Without compelling use cases, or user stories, supporters were left to 
create their own, or rely on communication materials describing concepts that were difficult to understand. 
Jeff Alderson felt that the perspective of parents had been neglected from the very start of inBloom’s 
product development. He felt that if inBloom had considered parents’ views, they would have built in 
talking points about privacy and security as they began their marketing campaigns. Tom Dunn reflects that 
he was asked to advance the adoption and development of a system without ever sufficiently being told 
what the utility of the product was. He recalled requesting examples of use cases to more clearly communi-
cate the value proposition and purpose to educators and parents: 
I kept going to meetings and saying what does this do? What is this capable of? What are the 
examples that I can talk about? I need narratives. I need to be able to tell people what it will mean 
for classroom teacher A and for classroom teacher B and a small school principal and a large school 
principal, and the parents. 
Data & Society Research Institute
24
Greg Mortimer, Chief Technology Officer of Jefferson County Schools in Colorado also found communi-
cating the value proposition of inBloom to be extremely difficult given an absence of use cases to share 
with parents and teachers. Jefferson County engaged in a proactive campaign of engaging teachers 
in the training process and producing videos to communicate the purpose and plans for their inBloom 
implementation. Many participants recalled the strong materials developed by Jefferson County, in fact 
James Peterson, Chief Technology Officer for the Bloomington School District in Illinois, said “I still use 
all their videos to talk about the problem I’m solving. I absolutely think that they were extremely visionary, 
extremely, in tying all the different pieces together that needed to happen.”
5.2 Was a Different Outcome Possible?
The inBloom initiative faced a perfect storm of problematic contexts and decisions, yet could any one 
factor, if changed, have resulted in a different outcome? A senior technical expert who examined the 
history of inBloom concluded that a lack of consistent leadership doomed the project from the start: 
“leadership discontinuity starting from the inception of the project is the single biggest reason the project 
wasn’t able to cope with the challenges it encountered.” A dedicated champion from the outset may have 
improved inBloom’s chance of success. Instead, leadership was handed off from Wireless Generation, 
to the SLC, to the Gates Foundation, and finally to inBloom. Perhaps with consistent leadership, better 
communication decisions may have been made, or inBloom would have started small, at the district level 
and grown more purposefully, outside of the public eye. Yet it seems no matter how strong the leadership 
or strategy, the visceral, fervently negative response to student data collection would likely have blindsided 
the project. 
A key takeaway from this study is the critical importance of achieving buy-in with the population served. 
It is evident from the interviews that although teachers and students were mentioned in discussions 
during inBloom’s brief tenure, only the Colorado and Illinois schools seemed to directly engage them and 
achieve buy-in. Cynthia Stevenson, former Superintendent of Jefferson County Schools, saw the promise 
of inBloom as, “Pretty revolutionary in being able to give teachers information instead of data… what I 
believed they were offering us was the ability to have assessment data synthesized and pulled together 
so that we had really good knowledge about groups of kids.” She and colleague Greg Mortimer both 
described the videos and training materials they prepared for teachers as they tried to show the value of 
data at the classroom level. Even so, in hindsight, Stevenson says, “We should have spent probably a year 
– before we ever started working on this – setting the stage. And when I say that what I mean is holding 
community meetings, helping parents understand it. You know, ‘what’s coming, why are we doing it,’ and 
lots of small group meetings where people could really look at it.” James Peterson, Chief Technology 
Officer for the Bloomington School District in Illinois said, “If you want to change your data culture and 
using data to inform instruction, it’s got to be rich, real time, because things change all the time in our 
schools. We know how schools work really well because we are schools.”
Yet in New York, concerned parents Olga Garcia-Kaplan and Leonie Haimson both said that at the school, 
district, and state level, it was difficult to get answers to their questions about what inBloom did. Garcia-Ka-
plan works in data science and wanted to better understand the value proposition and security dimensions, 
but felt it took an effort for her concerns to not be ignored. A few respondents mentioned the mismatch at 
PTA meetings of professionals in suits using legal or technical jargon rather than engaging with parents and 
www.datasociety.net 
The Legacy of inBloom   25
teachers, though other participants say that representatives from inBloom rarely (or never) attended public 
meetings with parents and teachers. Aimee Guidera, President of the Data Quality Campaign advises: “We’re 
never going to be done with changing that conversation and continuing to have parents and teachers and 
policymakers and students themselves understand the value proposition of why data matters.”  
Most interview participants saw great promise in inBloom’s standardizing of student data and stream-
lining the process of sharing data and providing learning apps. Yet many also voiced surprise that the 
resistance was so emphatic, at the same time acknowledging that communication was very poor. Along 
with Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg’s $100 million donation to Newark Schools34 at the same time, 
both efforts seem to suffer from not understanding the schooling ecosystem, whether the multiple layers 
of politics and bureaucracy or a fundamental hubris that creating different conditions for learning is easily 
accomplished and with immediate results. Sharren Bates shared her surprise that opponents to inBloom 
did not understand “the idea that school districts already manage significant amounts of student data and 
that legally they’re actually required to,” that much of the fear around student data privacy stemmed from 
a lack of understanding the current data practices of schools.
The sheer number of actors at the state and district levels was overwhelming. From our interviews, it seemed 
that very few of those engaged with early stages of inBloom understood the multiple layers of negotiation 
occurring. Adoption of technology was obviously not a simple matter, nor was it straightforward, and politics, 
rather than learning science35 seemed to dominate descriptions of the decision-making process.
6.0 Icarus also Flew36 : The Legacy of inBloom
The story of inBloom is not one of straightforward failure, but rather of shooting for the sun and being 
scorched during the journey. It is unlikely that any team could have anticipated the combined historic and 
social factors around data use that surfaced during inBloom’s development and launch. Many interview 
participants felt that inBloom was doomed by its own ambitions. Perhaps if the Race to the Top Funding 
hadn’t provided a compelling incentive to start large, inBloom may have enjoyed the iterative growth 
of Khan Academy or Clever, rather than immediately engaging in a multi-state consortium and its atten-
dant bureaucratic hurdles. Perhaps a progressive release would have allowed more dialogue with the 
public about the risks and opportunities of student data use. Or perhaps if visionary technologists better 
understood the education ecosystem, they would have waded in more carefully and better understood 
the mechanisms for sustainable and meaningful change. Undoubtedly, these were fatal missteps for the 
inBloom initiative. Yet, as David Graber argued in 2012,37 society needs visionaries to progress and grow. 
We need the risk takers who attempt to build flying cars or cure polio or land on the moon. Risk-taking 
34. Dale Russakoff, The Prize: Who’s in Charge of America’s Schools? (New York: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2015).
35. In terms of learning science, the now defunct SLC website had a page on personalized learning. It cited one study, by Benjamin 
Bloom, “The 2 Sigma Problem,” which reports more significant learning gains for students in a small tutoring group than those in a 
30-person classroom. Throughout our interviews and literature reviews, this study seemed formative in shaping the value prospect for 
many involved with inBloom. Perhaps the name change was a nod to this work, a hope to accomplish the achievement gains that Bloom 
found in personalized instruction.
36. Quoted from Jack Gilbert’s poem “Failing and Falling,” in Refusing Heaven (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 2005), available at: https://
www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/failing-and-flying.
37. David Graeber, “Of Flying Cars and the Declining Rate of Profit,” The Baffler, https://thebaffler.com/salvos/of-flying-cars-and-the-
declining-rate-of-profit.
Data & Society Research Institute
26
involves experimenting and failing and this is where the software development methods clashed with the 
responsibilities of schools to not fail, to approach experimenting with caution and care. Because of inBloom’s 
transparency in its ambitions and its open framework, it was vulnerable to the kind of public scrutiny that led 
to its demise. Unlike opaque, private systems, the usual struggles and uncertainties of a new initiative were 
enacted in the public sphere. 
No large-scale educational technology initiatives have ever succeeded in the U.S. K-12 space. Are large-
scale educational technology efforts doomed to fail? Is there an argument for their success and if so, who 
could lead these initiatives to ensure success? Whatever answers are eventually found to these questions, 
one thing is clear—the activity organized by inBloom’s development has caused them to be asked loud 
and clear across the boundaries of parents, technologists, and government officials alike. Yet one tragic 
lesson emerging from inBloom’s story and the subsequent successes of private businesses in this space 
seems to incentivize keeping processes closed and private and not share the discovery process. InBloom 
catalyzed national discussions around student data use and perhaps another discussion should be about 
how transparent innovation processes can be supported rather than penalized.
6.1 Lessons learned
Interview participants reported the ripple effects of student data privacy conversations across government, 
school administrators, education technology vendors, philanthropy organizations, and local communities. 
Since 2013, over 400 pieces of legislation have been introduced across state legislatures. Mary Fox Alter 
reported that New York State now mandates a data privacy officer. Jat Pannu, Chief Operating Officer of 
the IlliniCloud and K-12 Federation believes that “inBloom was a great solution, but it also highlighted a 
policy and governance gap that was in K-12 and unfortunately that gap eroded the value proposition of 
inBloom,” because it showed that schools were not ready for it. He further reflected on the impacts for 
educational technology vendors: 
I think inBloom was a quantum leap forward. It not only galvanized the marketplace towards 
a common area of opportunity for student achievement, but it also put a spotlight on an area 
where we should have been focusing a long time ago. And it caused vendors and other service 
providers to put resources towards this problem because what inBloom did was it left a very 
significant catalyst in the marketplace and created the activation energy for vendors to now 
work with different organizations to solve the student data privacy issue because now everyone 
realized what’s the type of risk that’s associated with the data that they’re collecting and keeping 
and storing. 
Streichenberger added, “inBloom led some companies, districts and states to take a deeper look at their 
data privacy and security. Until then, a very large percentage of the edtech companies and institutions had 
no or maybe a very vague privacy policy and at best a limited focus on security. As a consequence of the 
spotlight on inBloom under heavy fire despite its heavy investment in security and its robust and trans-
parent privacy policy, a lot of soul searching happened, with healthy questions starting to be raised such 
as: are we doing everything we can to secure the data we collect and produce, do we need to collect every 
one of these pieces of data and for what purpose, what is our data retention policy, who do we share it with 
and maybe most importantly, how do we engage our constituents in that process?”
www.datasociety.net 
The Legacy of inBloom   27
In the wake of inBloom, several data privacy advocacy groups built communities for dialogue, established 
best practices, and engaged in research projects around the benefits of data-driven instruction and also 
teacher and parent attitudes toward student data use. The Future of Privacy Forum and the Software & 
Information Industry Association introduced the Student Data Privacy Pledge,38 which as of January 2017 
had 323 signatories and is broadly endorsed by lawmakers, school districts, and data privacy advocates.39 
In the Fall of 2014, the Consortium for School Networking (CoSN) and the Data Quality Campaign 
convened a coalition of school administrators, parents, state education chiefs, and national education 
organizations to develop guidance on use of data in schools. They published ten student data principles 
recommended as a framework for educational institutions.40 Also in 2014, Common Sense launched the 
Privacy Evaluation Initiative, a consortium of over 100 school districts to help schools navigate the varied 
privacy policies of edtech used in K-12 classrooms, and to work with the software industry to standardize 
and simplify their privacy policies.41 
In the Fall of 2015, the Student Data Privacy Consortium (SDPC) was formed as a collaborative of schools, 
districts, regional and state agencies, policy makers, trade organizations and marketplace providers to 
address practical day to day data privacy concerns faced by on-the-ground practitioners. SDPC aims to 
act as a clearinghouse of student data privacy resources and develop new, shared tools and resources.42  
Recently, the Data Quality Campaign published policy guidelines to create a culture of support for data in 
classrooms. The four priorities they outline are: measure what matters, make data use possible, be trans-
parent and earn trust, guarantee access and protect privacy.43 The Data Quality Campaign has addition-
ally published state and national level studies of student data privacy policies and practices. 
James Peterson believes that, “InBloom may have failed as a business, but as a movement they only lit a 
fire underneath.” As someone working daily with student data and collaborating across his own state and 
with other states, he says:  
When it comes down to it, it really is a day to day function for school districts. Things that we 
have to do. Our kids show up at our doors every day and we have to take attendance, we have to 
gather all these kinds of things and then we want to take that information and be able to provide 
it out in different apps and make a richer environment.
We’re all doing the same thing. We all have the same problems to solve. And we’re not in compe-
tition with each other so us working together like that, if we could’ve done that a little bit better 
and really try to build out these toolsets for the operators themselves, this would have gone so 
much further.
The inBloom vision for collaboration across states around shared problems was seen by many as a 
strong practice. Jat Pannu describes it as “leveraging the great work that others are doing for your 
needs,” explaining: 
38. See: https://studentprivacypledge.org/.
39. See Natasha Singer’s critique of the Student Data Privacy pledge, particularly that it has no enforcement mandate and that some 
signatories show security lapses: http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2015/02/11/data-security-gaps-in-an-industry-student-privacy-pledge/.
40. See: http://studentdataprinciples.org/.
41. See: https://www.commonsense.org/education/privacy.
42. A4L.org, “About the Consortium,” accessed January 26, 2017, https://privacy.a4l.org/privacy-community/.
43. Data Quality Campaign, Time to Act: Federal Actions to Make Data Work for Students, June, 2016, http://2pido73em67o3ey-
taq1cp8au.wpengine.netdna-cdn.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/Federal-Recommendations.pdf.
Data & Society Research Institute
28
There’s trading experiences and there’s also the sharing of subject matter expertise, as well as 
assets. There could be a particular technology or implementation asset that was created by one of 
the members that they found to be very effective for solving their problems and another member 
of the federation could say ‘Hey, I have that same problem. Let me see if I can’t leverage what 
you’ve done and apply that for myself.’ Thus saving time, research, cost, etc. 
The momentum toward data-driven instruction may have been slowed by the backlash against inBloom, 
but in the two years following inBloom’s closure, several private companies have stepped into the space 
left open by the ambitious open source consortium. One participant commented, “they destroyed the 
brand, so it didn’t matter if the technology worked. No one was going to touch it.” Participants reflected 
on how, with a clear value proposition, users willingly engage in sharing personal data, citing Google Maps 
as a common example. Google Apps for Education, Edmodo, Clever, Class Dojo, Amplify, and Knewton 
were mentioned in interviews as engaging in differing levels of data use. Fox Alter reports that her district 
uses Microsoft Office 365 because: “they won’t market to kids, they won’t share it, they talk about how long 
they’ll hold onto it, storage, the whole nine yards.” Transparency remains a challenge in this space and 
discussions continue around privacy policies and practice.
6.2 Conclusions
Whether data-driven instruction fulfills its promise remains an open question as practice and platforms 
continue to evolve. Is student data safer without inBloom? The legacy of inBloom seems evolutionary not 
revolutionary. While inBloom catalyzed a national discussion of student data privacy, resulting practice 
does not consistently reflect the values of transparency and grassroot engagement. The public response 
to inBloom has driven educational technology vendors toward closed systems, that tend to be indepen-
dent and piecemeal, rather than part of larger, open consortiums. Current applications do not address all 
the aspirations a single set of standards could, nor do they reduce costs or complexity in the way a shared 
open source platform might have. Instead we’re seeing baby steps that are proprietary and disconnected 
from each other (not unlike prior generations of edtech software). These systems are typically closed and 
lack the transparency advocated by inBloom’s opponents. 
The public rarely sees how companies experiment and iterate. Consumers often see only a finished 
product, rather than a process of discovery. They do not see how many times a software program crashes 
or how many tests are needed until it works smoothly. There can also be a sense that harm is a foregone 
conclusion of risk, rather than a possibility. In the case of inBloom, the public’s fear of uncertainty, 
combined with a belief that potential risks were reality rather than possibility, were strong factors in the 
public backlash. InBloom’s ambition to be open and transparent actually left it vulnerable to public attack. 
Unlike private companies whose discovery process is basically a black box, inBloom’s processes were 
public, and thus open to scrutiny. Without widespread buy-in to the value of the initiative, inBloom did 
not have sufficient support to weather the public backlash. Large-scale, ambitious, public initiatives will 
continue to be slowed or meet a similar fate to inBloom if there is not a counter-narrative to the public’s 
low tolerance for uncertainty and risk. As the process of discovery becomes more transparent due to digital 
media, there needs to be a shift in how we view risk and uncertainty, because depending on whether we 
see this as weakness or opportunity will determine the future of education and innovation more broadly.  
www.datasociety.net 
The Legacy of inBloom   29
 Acknowledgements
This report is a product of the Enabling Connected Learning project at Data & Society.  Enabling 
Connected Learning is generously supported by the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation. The 
authors wish to thank interview participants in this study and also those who provided background informa-
tion informally. We also wish to thank our reviewers danah boyd, Steven Hodas, Christopher Laubenthal, 
James Peterson, and Jim Siegl. Special thanks to our editor Patrick Davison, and to the Data & Society 
community for their intellectual and administrative support. Additional thanks to the bloggers, journalists, 
advocates, and academics who covered the inBloom story as it unfolded.
Data & Society currently receives support from organizations implicated in this report, including Microsoft 
and, in the past, the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. No funder played a role in the development, 
analysis, or production of this report.
Data & Society Research Institute
30
Authors 
Monica Bulger, PhD is a Researcher in the Enabling Connected 
Learning initiative at the Data & Society Research Institute where  
she studies data use in education, focusing on personalized learning, 
privacy, equity, and digital literacy. She serves on the International 
Advisory Board for Global Kids Online, a collaboration between 
UNICEF , LSE, and international partners to study the risks and oppor-
tunities of children’s use of the internet. Monica holds a PhD  
in Education with an emphasis in cognitive science and social dimen-
sions of technology. Her recent work focuses on children’s rights in 
digital and learning spaces.
Patrick McCormick is a manager and strategist working at the inter-
section of public policy, emerging technology, and innovation and has 
experience working in and consulting to government organizations 
in the U.S. and Australia. His areas of expertise include internet and 
broadband policy, civic tech and smart cities, co-production, organiza-
tional change, governance, and digital transformation. Patrick has an 
MPA from the Harvard Kennedy School and a BA from the University of 
California Berkeley. Patrick is a former employee of Public Consulting 
Group which had a $31 million contract with the New York State 
Department of Education for the Education Data Portal project and 
served as a product manager.
Mikaela Pitcan is a social scientist and mental health clinician. Her 
areas of research include the impact of technology on behavior, and 
the intersection of race and gender within schooling and employment. 
She holds a BS in psychology from the University of Florida, a MS.Ed in 
Mental Health Counseling from Fordham University Graduate School 
of Education and is currently a doctoral candidate in Counseling 
Psychology at Fordham University.
 

www.datasociety.net 
The Legacy of inBloom   31
 
Appendix 1: List of Participants
Name Role during inBloom Current position
Jeff Alderson Chief Solutions Architect at 
ConnectEDU 
Lead Architect at Houghton Mifflin 
Harcourt (formerly Choice Solutions)
Principal Analyst of Enterprise Software, 
Eduventures
Sharren Bates Senior Program Officer, Gates 
Foundation  
Chief Product Officer, inBloom
Principal Consultant, Product and 
Technology Strategy at ThoughtWorks
Rob Curtin Chief Applications Officer,  
US Education, Microsoft
Director of Higher Education, Worldwide 
Public Sector, Microsoft
Tom Dunn Communications Director, New York 
State Education Department
Principal, EdComm NY
Mary Fox Alter Superintendent, Pleasantville School 
District, New York
Superintendent, Pleasantville School 
District, New York
Olga Garcia-Kaplan Concerned parent 
 
Student Privacy Advocate
Aimee Guidera President and CEO, Data Quality 
Campaign
President and CEO, Data Quality 
Campaign
Leonie Haimson Executive Director, Class Size Matters Executive Director, Class Size Matters
Steven Hodas Executive Director of the Office 
of Innovation, New York City 
Department of Education
Head of Product, Citymart
Greg Mortimer CIO, Jefferson County School District Executive Director of Administrative Data 
Services, Adams 12 Five Star Schools
Jat Pannu Senior Vice President, Professional 
Services, inBloom
Chief Operating Officer, IlliniCloud and 
K12 Federation
James Peterson Chief Technology Officer, 
Bloomington School District
Chief Technology Officer, Bloomington 
School District
Hope Reno Consultant, Public Consulting Group
Cynthia Stevenson, PhD Superintendent, Jefferson County 
School District
Senior Consultant, PEBC 
Senior Instructor, University of Colorado, 
Denver
Iwan Streichenberger CEO, inBloom Consultant
continued on following page
Data & Society Research Institute
32
Name Role during inBloom Current position
James Yap US Advisory Board and Technical 
Board Member, SIF Association 
Director of Instructional Technology & 
Data Management, Ramapo Central 
School District, New York
Assistant Superintendent of Curriculum 
& Instructional Services, Warwick Valley 
Central School District, New York
A senior technical expert 
who has closely examined 
the history of inBloom 
Former employee of Wireless 
Generation 
www.datasociety.net 
The Legacy of inBloom   33
Appendix 2: Timeline
ARIS launched
Slow entry, distant exit paper published by Larry Berger and David Stevenson
2010
2008
2009
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
Race to the Top $4.35 billion competitive grant authorized by 
U.S. Department of Education
02.13
03.13
04.13
05.13
08.13
05.12
09.14
09.13
12.13
02.14
04.14
06.13
07.13
11.13
Gates Foundation announces $83.3 million in funding of the 
Shared Learning Collaborative
Nine states participating in Shared Learning Cooperative: CO, DE, GA, IL, KY , 
LA, MA, NY , NC
Five states identified for Phase 1 Pilot: NY , CO, IL, MA, and NC
Public launch of inBloom
Bill Gates and Iwan Streichenberger announce launch of inBloom at SxSW conference
State Superintendent announces Louisiana will pull out of inBloom
Reports that Kentucky, Georgia, and Delaware are pulling out of partnership
North Carolina announces they will not participate
inBloom closure announced
McKinsey report identifies ‘consistent gap in academic achievement’
Initial idea of what would become the Shared Learning Infrastructure/
inBloom conceived and developed by Wireless Generation
Amendments to FERPA expand term ‘school 
officials’ to include vendors and contractors 
Diane Ravitch publishes The Death and Life 
of the Great American School System: How 
Testing and Choice Undermine Education
Over 40 states begin adopting Common 
Core curriculum standards (by 2014)
Rupert Murdoch’s News Corp purchases 
90% of Wireless Generation
Wikileaks publishes documents about U.S. 
military info provided by Chelsea Manning
FTC launches inquiry into Facebook’s 
privacy policy
California approves first state-level student 
data privacy bill: SOPIPA
Student Data Privacy pledge introduced
Occupy Wall Street protests
News of the World phone hacking scandal
Parliamentary committee finds Murdoch 
complicit in phone hacking
Snowden revelations
Federal Student Digital Privacy Act proposed
Target data breach
10.14
04.15
01.13
New York City Mayoral race, candidates 
weigh in against student data sharing
COPPA expanded to include ‘any 
persistent identifier that can be used to 
recognize the user over time…’
Twelve New York parents file lawsuit against NYSED sharing student data 
with inBloom
Fifty Assembly Democrats submit letter to NYSED requesting withholding 
student data from inBloom
New York judge dismisses lawsuit against NYSED for their use of  inBloom
Data & Society Research Institute
36 West 20th Street, 11th Floor
New York, NY 10011
Tel 646.832.2038
Fax 646.832.2048
info@datasociety.net
http://www.datasociety.net
Contact
Dr. Monica Bulger
monica@datasociety.net