
--- Page 1 ---

  
Copyright © 2016 ESP Solutions Group 
1 
 
  
T H E  O P T I M A L  R E F E R E N CE  G U I D E 
MyData Button: Button, Button, Who’s Got the Button? 
Nobody!  Click one button and get all your education data!   
Too good to be true?  Yes. 
  
Extraordinary insight™ into today’s education information topics  
By Glynn D. Ligon, Ph.D., ESP Solutions Group, Inc. 
  


--- Page 2 ---

  
Copyright 2016 ESP Solutions Group 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 3 ---

  
Copyright 2016 ESP Solutions Group 
 
 
Table of Contents 
 
The Background ............................................................................................................................................ 1 
ESP’s MyData Button Solution ..................................................................................................................... 4 
What Should Everyone Do Now? ................................................................................................................. 5 
Editorial......................................................................................................................................................... 5 
History of MyData Button and the Quest to Find One ............................................................................... 6 
 

--- Page 4 ---

  
Copyright 2016 ESP Solutions Group 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 5 ---

  
Copyright 2016 ESP Solutions Group 
Page 1 
MyData Button: Button, Button, Who’s Got the 
Button?  
 
Nobody!  Click one button and get all your education data!  Too 
good to be true?  Yes. 
 
The Background 
 
Where’s MyData Button for students?  Back in 2012, the White House, 
the Secretary of Education, and several major companies promised to 
give students a single button to click to download ALL of their education 
data.  Their data would be in a common digital format to use themselves 
in so many ways.  The students would be enlightened, informed, and 
empowered.  Wow!  Now in 2016, no buttons can be found.   
 
I asked the U.S. Department of Education (USED) where MyData Button 
is—no button.  I asked each of those companies—no buttons.  
Apparently no one else is asking why.   
 
Education’s MyData Button was part of a bigger initiative by the Obama 
administration to promote open access by government.  Remember 
when transparency was a big deal and the Obama administration was 
going to be the most transparent one ever?  Giving data back to the 
consumer (termed “smart disclosure”) was a core component of its Open 
Government Directive.  I’ve now sent two questions to the White House 
through their website—one to staff, one to the President.  No response.   
 
“Open access” of government data as a concept by the Obama 
administration is naïve for the education industry.  “Smart disclosure” 
assumes that the students can have personal access to their data on 
demand—at the push of a button.  The local school district isn’t a branch 
of Wells Fargo Bank.  In the education IT community, students don’t have 
a few, directly connected accounts for which statements with a daily 
activity record for each can be printed as .PDFs.   
 
Students have demographic, enrollment, attendance, family, meals, 
transportation, extra-curricular, behavior diagnostic, formative 
assessment, art, physical fitness, remedial program, gifted program, 
counseling, graduation plan, grades, transcript, daily lessons, discipline, 
and multiple EdTech app records distributed across multitudinous 
databases.   
 
 
 

--- Page 6 ---

  
Copyright 2016 ESP Solutions Group 
Page 2 
Did the White House think a student might go to each of these websites 
separately to gather data, then be able to concatenate them into a 
manageable record because standard definitions and formatting had 
been used by each of them?  
 
With whom did they consult before issuing their press release?  Did the 
companies who signed up not talk to their education agency clients first?   
 
MyData Button is the quintessential representation of hopeful Occam’s 
Razor optimism.  Translated, that means the White House must have 
hoped that the simplest solution—a button to click—would meet the 
requirements of a problem that anyone with rudimentary experience 
and understanding of the education information ecosystem would have 
easily seen as confounding.    
 
Veteran’s Affairs and the Department of Energy have functioning data 
buttons.  Why is MyData Button impossible for education data?  Is it our 
complex data, aloof customers, resistant data managers (USED, SEAs, 
LEAs, vendors)—or the opposition of self-appointed privacy watchdogs? 
After months of wondering and researching, I think I know why.  Yet 
again, the education enterprise has proven to behave differently from 
other industries.   
 
 Data governance is less precisely defined and policies less 
publicized even though FERPA has been around since 1974.   
 
 Data standards are, well, not very standard for exchanging data 
among applications and agencies.  Oh, yes, there are several 
exchange standards to choose from and multiple definition 
standards to adopt.  The U.S. Department of Education even 
developed a guide for MyData Button for the different standards.  
All a student would need to do is learn all of them, and crosswalk 
their data across them, and then begin to interpret any user-
defined fields and rules allowed by the standards.  (Any student 
capable of doing this should go to www.espsg.com and contact 
me for a job application.)   
 
 The White House never mentioned anywhere the need for a 
common metadata dictionary or a crosswalk among the data 
sources.  The USED and its National Center for Education 
Statistics have historically developed metadata dictionaries (e.g., 
Student and Staff Data Handbooks, and Common Education Data 
Standards), then stopped short of any official designation of 
them to ensure universal adoption by vendors and education 
agencies.  
 

--- Page 7 ---

  
Copyright 2016 ESP Solutions Group 
Page 3 
 This one is a question.  Did the demise of inBloom scare away the 
developers and supporters of MyData Buttons?     
 
 Oh, yes, then there are those multitudinous data sources spread 
out across the education agency.  
 
 
MyData Button is a classic example of encountering the intertwined 
obstacles erected by this data milieu.   
 
Because there are solutions to each of these issues, it’s worth the effort 
to document the MyData Button saga.   
 
MyData Button is an idea that seems to work for the VA and the 
Department of Energy when an individual has an account—a secure 
account.  That’s when an account, or a record, holds an individual’s data.  
Those data may be extensive.  There may even be more than one 
account for an individual.  However, if we think about our multiple 
financial accounts in our bank, they are all very similar in terms of their 
data elements and formats.  They share your exact personal data such 
that they can be considered either already federated or even a single 
account with various transactions—checking, savings, loans, IRAs, etc.  
That’s an account like the VA or the Department of Energy could create.    
 
The bottom line is that the USED’s MyData Button should be working 
today on the FSA website—no excuses—just like similar buttons are 
working for the VA and the Department of Energy.  Students using FSA’s 
website have an account—a clearly defined set of data about a single 
individual, in a single location.  FSA was announced in 2012 as the site of 
MyData Button’s first appearance.  Renamed to Mystudentdata 
Download, it never appeared.  Links to it and directions how to use it are 
still live on the Internet.   
 
On the other hand, MyData Button was a bad idea from the beginning as 
a universal notion for all education entities and EdTech companies.  As 
un-American as it may sound at first, students shouldn’t expect to get 
their personal data directly from all companies and applications off the 
Web with whom they are interacting.  One of the biggest problems for a 
data button in the education industry is that the vendors, when they are 
holders of student data, don’t own the student data.  They don’t make 
the decision to release the data when a student clicks the button.  The 
education agency in which they are enrolled controls ownership and 
usage of their data and has to decide how to respond to requests for 
access—see FERPA.   
 
There’s another factor to consider.  An education agency’s data are not 
simply stored in a single location readily accessible for download with the 
click of a button.  Creating a federated system for accessing all of a 

--- Page 8 ---

  
Copyright 2016 ESP Solutions Group 
Page 4 
student’s data on demand is impractical.  As an agency’s disparate data 
sources evolve, are updated, are added, and change their technology, 
maintaining a federated system that can pull together a student’s data in 
near real time or even within a reasonable time simply is not going to 
work.  For an agency to provide access for a student or parent directly to 
all of the EdTech applications that contain a student’s data is a security 
and confidentiality nightmare for the EdTech vendor, the agency, and the 
student/parent.   
 
Agencies have built data warehouses that periodically capture student 
data from authoritative data sources.  A typical data warehouse may 
hold a lot of data, but not nearly the majority of an agency’s data.  In 
addition, these data may have a degree of de-identification imposed 
depending upon their intended audiences and the agency’s data 
governance policy.  A truly de-identified database would be useless for 
MyData Button.  A well-secured database behind an institutional firewall 
would be impractical for MyData Button.  Open access and smart 
disclosure are not compatible with the concepts of de-identification and 
firewalls that protect the privacy of student data under FERPA.      
 
Each agency must design the creative solution for access to personally 
identifiable data by students that works within a data governance plan 
adopted for their overall system.  A simple button seems, well, simplistic 
given the complexities of the data, the data systems, and the data 
policies.   
 
ESP’s MyData Button Solution 
 
ESP’s goal for our clients is to provide students and parents of minor 
students transparency to the education data collected and stored about 
the student.   Alternatively where appropriate, desirable, or practical, an 
education agency should provide access to the data themselves.   
ESP solves this in two ways. 
 
1. Data Governance Policy  
 
 ESP provides expert services to guide an education 
agency in developing their Data Governance Policy 
that provides the process for accessing the students’ 
data. 
 The Data Governance Policy describes how students 
and parents discover what data are collected, stored, 
and reported. 
 
 
 

--- Page 9 ---

  
Copyright 2016 ESP Solutions Group 
Page 5 
2. DataSpecs®  
 
 ESP provides this metadata dictionary describing the 
data collected, stored, and reported about a student.  
www.DataSpecsCentral.com  
 Students and parents can see reports describing 
these data. 
 
So, there’s no ESP MyData Button.  There’s an actual governance solution 
built upon the realities of how education data are collected, stored, and 
managed to protect the privacy of the student while serving the public 
mandates that required the collection of the data.  Within this solution is 
the foundational tool, DataSpecs®, that manages the metadata and data 
governance processes. 
What Should Everyone Do Now? 
 
First, FSA should launch their Mystudentdata Download button as 
advertised.   
 
Next, USED should abandon MyData Button for all other USED activities.  
Instead, their focus should be on supporting data governance policy 
development.  Each policy should have a foundation of a metadata 
dictionary for the education agency to manage and publish their data 
collections, databases, and outputs where information can be accessed.    
 
Companies should work with their client education agencies to 
understand the data governance policies under which they operate and 
must comply.  A student data download process may or may not work for 
their product dependent upon each context and contract.   
 
The Data Quality Campaign has provided useful general guidance in their 
recent publication “Time to Act: Making Data Work for Students.”  
http://dataqualitycampaign.org/resource/time-to-act/  
 
Editorial 
 
Not every idea is going to be great.  MyData Button works for VA and 
Energy, ought to work for FSA, but the grand vision the White House had 
in 2012 was naïve.  There’s considerable complexity, design, and policy 
required for a solution to a problem like giving students access to all their 
education data.  The timeline published for launching MyData Button 
was unrealistic from the start.  Let’s get the puns out of the way.  Did the 
White House think this button would be a snap done on a shoe string?    

--- Page 10 ---

  
Copyright 2016 ESP Solutions Group 
Page 6 
History of MyData Button and the Quest to Find One  
 
The Obama Administration promoted open access to data for the 
consumer (termed “smart disclosure”) as a core component of its Open 
Government Directive.  The principals (sic) behind smart disclosure were 
summarized in a September 8, 2011 memorandum titled “Informing 
Consumers through Smart Disclosure.” 
https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/omb/inforeg/for-
agencies/informing-consumers-through-smart-disclosure.pdf  
 
Smart disclosure was led by the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs’ (VA) 
Blue Button (http://www.va.gov/bluebutton/) and US Department of 
Energy’s (DOE) Green Button (http://energy.gov/data/green-button) 
initiatives.  The Blue Button allows veterans to view and download their 
personal health records in a plain text format.  A number of companies 
offers derivative solutions that utilize these data.  Data may be viewed 
on mobile devices and jobs may be applied for using military service 
data.  The Green Button allows consumers to download their home 
energy usage data from their electricity utility provider. 
 
January 19, 2012, the Executive Office of the President announced 
MyData Button would appear on USED’s FSA website.  Five companies 
were named in the announcement as committing to launch “MyData 
Button” features, ETS, StraighterLine, Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 
Pearson, and Parchment.   
 
Hack Education’s blog by Audrey Waters on April 11, 2012, examined the 
challenges of MyData Button.  
http://hackeducation.com/2012/04/11/download-all-your-education-
data-with-the-click-of-one-button  
 
Then on May 22, 2012, “MyData Open Data Specification” was published 
for education.  USED called upon education entities (schools, universities, 
test preparation companies, etc.) and service providers to offer an easy-
to-use data download button for their customers.  The goal of this 
initiative was to create a simple-to-use mechanism for consumers to 
download their education data in a machine-readable format on a 
provider’s website and to define an open-data format for a provider to 
offer this functionality with minimal implementation burden by 
leveraging data standards already in use.  The specification even included 
detail file formats for the data downloads. 
 
On August 16, 2012, Pamela Eliadis, Service Director, System Operations 
and Aid Delivery Management, Federal Student Aid, announced that 
MyData Button would be available on the NSLDS Student Access website.  
https://www.nslds.ed.gov/npas/index.htm  Specific details were 

--- Page 11 ---

  
Copyright 2016 ESP Solutions Group 
Page 7 
provided along with detailed descriptions of MyData Button’s purpose 
and contents.  Those are still live on FSA’s website. 
That was a virtual flurry of activity, wasn’t it. 
 
On May 30, 2014, I emailed Kathleen Styles, the designated U.S. 
Department of Education contact for MyData Button.  She replied the 
same day, “Let me ask around and see if I can direct you to contact.”  
That was her only communication.  On March 22, 2016, I sent another 
email to Kathleen Stiles asking what the status was.  To date, no 
response has been received.   
 
During the week of April 11, 2016, I sent queries to ETS, Pearson, and 
Houghton Mifflin Harcourt through their websites or the emails provided 
on them.  As of the writing of this paper, each replied with an automated 
message that they would get back to me within 24 to 48 hours.  None 
has responded to provide an update on the absence of their MyData 
Button.  Parchment’s email, sent at the same time elicited a personal 
response from a cell phone saying, “I'm not familiar with the feature you 
are describing. Could you provide more detail?”  I did.   
 
On April 14, 2016, I entered a question on the White House website 
asking the status of MyData Button.  No response has been received.   
 
At some point, MyData Button was renamed by FSA to Mystudentdata 
Download.  https://studentaid.ed.gov/sa/resources/mystudentdata-
download  Detailed definitions and instructions of how to access it and 
what it does are on the FSA website.  However, Mystudentdata 
Download does not exist—and never did.  After an exhaustive search of 
the FSA website to find MyStudentData Download following every link 
provided, I finally called the 1-800-433-3243 help line on April 19, 2016.  
The recording of the call is available at https://youtu.be/nthaTVuHGhk   
The person I spoke with confirmed that MyStudentData Download was 
never on the FSA website. 
 
On April 21, 2016, I entered a question on the President’s website.  To 
date, no response has been received.  (Yes, I check my junk email.)   
 
On April 27, 2016, Parchment, a transcript exchange vendor, emailed that they had 
implemented a MyData Button for about 18 months.  Based upon “nearly no usage,” 
they removed the button and have no plans to re-implement it.   
 
As of April 28, 2016, there was no evidence on the Internet that any 
education entity had MyData Button in service.  The only one I ever 
found was The Department of Defense Education Activity’s (DODEA) 
MyData Button on their MyData Parent Portal through 2014.     
http://www.dodea.edu/mydata/

--- Page 12 ---

  
 
 
 
 
 
About ESP Solutions Group 
ESP Solutions Group provides its clients with 
Extraordinary Insight™ into P20W education 
data systems and psychometrics.  Our team 
is comprised of industry experts who 
pioneered the concept of “data-driven 
decision making” and now help optimize the 
management of our clients’ state and local 
education agencies’ information systems. 
 
ESP personnel have advised school districts, 
all state education agencies, and the U.S. 
Department of Education on the practice of 
P20W data management.  We are regarded 
as leading experts in understanding the data 
and technology implications of ESSA, SIF, 
EDFacts, CEDS, state reporting, metadata 
standards, data governance, data 
visualizations, and emerging issues. 
 
Dozens of education agencies have hired ESP 
to design and build their longitudinal data 
systems, state and federal reporting systems, 
metadata dictionaries, 
evaluation/assessment programs, and data 
management/analysis and visualization 
systems. 
 
To learn how ESP can give your agency 
Extraordinary Insight into your P20W 
education data, contact us at (512) 879-5300 
or info@espsg.com. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This document is part of The Optimal 
Reference Guide Series, designed to help 
decision makers analyze, manage, and share 
data in the 21st Century. 
 
 
 
My Data Button: Button, Button, Who’s Got 
the Button? © 2016 by ESP Solutions Group, 
Inc.  All rights reserved.  No part of this 
paper shall be reproduced, stored in a 
retrieval system, or transmitted by any 
means, electronic, mechanical, 
photocopying, recording, or otherwise, 
without written permission from the 
publisher. 
 
 
Follow and respond to tweets investigating 
MyData Button at https://twitter.com/espsg 
or http://www.p20wforum.info/. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
