
--- Page 1 ---

Postsecondary Electronic Standards Council
Education Record User Group
Notes from the April 24, 2012 Conference Call
On today’s call were
Jeffrey Alderson, Director of Development, ConnectEDU, Inc. and Member of the PESC
Board of Directors
Bob Hewett, Principal Software Engineer, Data Solutions, Pearson, and 
Co-Chair of
ERUG
Scott Hillman, Retired VP, Operations & Customer Services, Parchment
Tom Stewart, Retired Registrar, Miami Dade College (FL) and Member of the AACRAO
SPEEDE Committee
Romy Teh, VP, Program Management & Client Services, Xap Corporation
Bob started today’s call at 3 minutes after the hour.
MyData Specification: Jeff Alderson from the PESC Board and from ConnectEDU had
earlier suggested the potential use of MyData in our XML work in PESC.  He joined us
on today’s call and briefed us on the initiative from the US White House and the US
Department of Education (primarily Federal Student Aid) to place usable electronic
student data in the hands of the students who can benefit from the use of their own data. 
The MIME format and other ZIP formats, among others, were discussed briefly as a
possible wrapper for the data.
  
The proposal now being discussed is focused on the products that might be made
available from service providers.
The following is a brief dialog provided by Jeff Alderson in response to several questions
from Bob Hewett:
From Bob:  Why would a university want to adopt this standard? They definite ly wouldn’t
want to give it away for free .
From Jeff: The White House is singularly focused on enabling learners  to get access to
and "unlock" their own data stored in various systems and services. This wouldn't be
something for a University to adopt directly. Rather, this would be a service or feature of
an existing product that a service provider such as College Board or ConnectEDU or an
SIS/ERP vendor like Pearson or Oracle would provide. The goal here is  to provide any
data that a service provider collects on an individual learner back to the learner in an
electronic format for the learner to take with them and do with the data as they wish.
 
April 24, 2012 Page 1 of 3 pages by Tom Stewart

--- Page 2 ---

PESC ERUG Conference Call Notes for April 24, 2012
From Bob:  There is no mention of security.  Universities would be reluctant to deliver data
to students that could easily be manipulated by any computer savvy college student. What
precautions could be put in place to make sure the files could not be  modified by the
receiving party?  Signing the bundle?  Signed Zip files?
From Jeff:  The assumption here is that the data in the files would be unencrypted and
open, and would also be considered "unofficial." As the goal of this data payload is for the
learner to take it with them and re-upload into another service provider, such as a service
provided by ConnectEDU for college and career planning, the learner would not be helping
themselves by manipulating the content of the data file.  Also, for service prov iders that
build interfaces to ingest this data, it would be done with the knowledge that the data is
open and could have been modified, and would be properly flagged as "self-reported" by
the student. This is not intended to be a replacement for existing, secure, re cords
exchange networks.  
From Bob:  EDI is not listed as a standard and that is what most universities use. (I realize
that the standard can easily support any text-based standard, but I thought I’d mention it).
From Jeff: As the goal of this project was learner-centric and not University focused, the
conversation quickly turned to leveraging the most "modern" XML standards, as they would
be the easiest to deploy by the service providers. I don't believe that the proposed solution
would exclude the ability of EDI to be put into the multi-part wrapper, but XML was
certainly the focus of the conversations.
From Bob:  To answer your question, everyone thought that it is technically feasible, but
there were concerns about giving text based standard data to students a nd whether a
MIME based delivery system is the best delivery mechanism since it implies that som e
installed application would be needed to take advantage of the data.
From Jeff:  The assumption is that it will be the responsibility of service providers to build
products and services around this data payload, and provide added  value services to
individual learners that show up with the data in this format.
From Bob:  Joseph Giroux was interested in this for the Portfolio work group.
From Jeff:  Glad to hear it. I recommended that the emerging ePortfolio XML s tandard
should be used/supported as modern portfolio and planning systems could  use that
standard to export all the individual learner data that is outside the scope of the traditional
transcript.  Everyone in this working group agreed, and was looking forward to seeing draft
specifications.
Crosswalk Rule from PESC XML Transcripts to EDI TS130: Karen Lee from James Madison University
in Virginia pointed out a discrepancy among these crosswalks for the use of the SCED code to identify the
course content for high school courses.  In several of the crosswalks, the SCED code is mapped to a REF
segment and in others, it is mapped to a NTE segment.  The AACRAO SPEEDE Committee discussed the
issue on its last call and agreed the most appropriate mapping would b e to a REF segment in the EDI
TS130.
On today’s call, ERUG agreed that mapping to a REF segment is a better fit.
April 24, 2012 Page 2 of 3 pages by Tom Stewart

--- Page 3 ---

PESC ERUG Conference Call Notes for April 24, 2012
Tom will revise the mapping in the appropriate crosswalks, add a new tab for the affected crosswalks to
point out the changes, and ask Michael Sessa to replace the affected crosswalks with the revised ones on
the EDI and XML Crosswalks Page on the PESC.org web site.
Future PESC ERUG calls: Since Bob Hewett now has another commitment every other week at the time
of our calls, we agreed to change from weekly calls to regular calls every other week. 
Today’s call ended at 35 minutes after the hour.
Next ERUG Conference Call is Tuesday, May 8, 2012 at noon Eastern (11 am Central, 10 am Mountain,
and 9 am Pacific) Daylight Saving Time. Call 888.205.5513 and use participant code 952016#. 
Next Face to Face Meeting of ERUG:  PESC Spring 2012 Data Summit May 2 - 4, 2012 in Las Vegas at
the Wynn | Encore Hotel.  ERUG session is scheduled from 8:30 am to 10:15 am on Thursday, May 3 in
the hotel’s Alsace Room 2.
April 24, 2012 Page 3 of 3 pages by Tom Stewart